Full text of "Henry Kissinger Diplomacy"
See other formats
HENRY 




In this controversial and monumental book — 
arguably his most important — Henry Kissinger 
illuminates just what diplomacy is. Moving from a 
sweeping overview of his own interpretation of 
history to personal accounts of his negotiations 
with world leaders, Kissinger describes the ways 
in which the art of diplomacy and the balance of 
power have created the world we live in, and 
shows how Americans, protected by the size and 
isolation of their country, as well as by their own 
idealism and mistrust of the Old World, have 
sought to conduct a unique kind of foreign policy 
based on the way they wanted the world to be, 
as opposed to the way it really is. 

Spanning more than three centuries of history, 
from Cardinal Richelieu, the father of the modem 
state system, to the “New World Order,” in which 
we live, Kissinger demonstrates how modem 
diplomacy emerged from the trials and experi- 
ences of the balance of power of warfare and 
peacemaking, and why America, sometimes to its 
peril, refused to learn its lessons. 

His intimate portraits of world leaders, includ- 
ing de Gaulle, Nixon, Chou En-lai, Mao Tse-tung, 
Reagan, and Gorbachev, based on personal expe- 
rience and knowledge, provide the reader with a 
rare window on diplomacy at the summit, togeth- 
er with a wealth of detailed and original observa- 
tions on the secret negotiations, great events, 
and the art of statesmanship that have shaped 
our lives in the decades before, during and since 
Henry Kissinger was himself at the center of 
things. 

Analyzing the differences in the national styles 


of diplomacy, Kissinger shows how various soci- 
eties produce special ways of conducting foreign 
policy, and how Americans, from the very begin- 
ning, sought a distinctive foreign policy based on 
idealism. He illustrates his points with his own 
insights and with examples from his own experi- 
ence, as well as with candid accounts of his 
breakthrough diplomatic initiatives as Nixon’s for- 
eign policy partner. 

Informed by deep historical knowledge, wit, a 
gift for irony, and a unique understanding of the 
forces that bind and sunder nations, Kissinger’s 
Diplomacy is must reading for anyone who cares 
about America’s position in the world. 


Henry Alfred Kissinger was sworn in on 
September 22, 1973, as the fifty-sixth Secretary of 
State, a position he held until January 20, 1977. 
He also served as Assistant to the President for 
National Security Affairs from January 20, 1969, 
until November 3, 1975. 

Among the awards Dr. Kissinger has received 
have been the Nobel Peace Prize in 1973; the 
Presidential Medal of Freedom (the nation’s high- 
est civilian award) in 1977; and the Medal of 
Liberty in 1986. 

Dr. Kissinger was bom in Furth, Germany, came 
to the United States in 1938 and was naturalized a 
United States citizen in 1943. He served in the 
Army from 1943 to 1946. He graduated summa 
cum laude from Harvard College in 1950. From 
1954 until 1969 he was a member of the faculty of 
Harvard University. He was Director of the 
Harvard International Seminar from 1952 to 1969. 

Dr. Kissinger is married to the former Nancy 
Maginnes and is the father of two children by a 
previous marriage. 


Jacket design Bernadette Evangelist copyright© 1994 
by Robert Anthony, Inc. 

- Front jacket photo courtesy of Culver Pictures 
Back jacket photo courtesy of Chinese Press Photo 
Printed in the U.S A Copyright © 1994 Simon & Schuster 


0«H435OO 




HENRY 

KISSINGER 


DIPLOMACY 


SIMON & SCHUSTER 

New York London Toronto Sydney Tokyo Singapore 



SIMON & SCHUSTER 
ROCKEFELLER CENTER 
1230 AVENUE OF TOE AMERICAS 
NEW YORK, NEW YORK 10020 

COPYRIGHT © 1994 BY HENRY A. KISSINGER 

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 
INCLUDING THE RIGHT OF REPRODUCTION 
IN WHOLE OR IN PART IN ANY FORM. 

SIMON & SCHUSTER AND COLOPHON ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS 
OF SIMON & SCHUSTER INC. 

DESIGNED BY EVE METZ 
PHOTO RESEARCH BY NATALIE GOLDSTEIN 
MAPS BY ANITA KARL, JAMES KEMP/COMPASS PROJECTIONS 
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

13579 10 8642 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
KISSINGER, HENRY 
DIPLOMACY/HENRY KISSINGER. 

P. CM. 

INCLUDES BIBLIOGRAPHICAL REFERENCES AND INDEX. 

1. DIPLOMACY. 2. UNITED STATES— FOREIGN RELATIONS ADMINISTRATION. 

I. TITLE. 

jx1662.k57 1994 

327.73— dc20 93*44001 

CIP 

ISBN 0-671 -6599 1"X 

The title Diplomacy has been used before. 

Both the author and the publisher pay tribute to the late 
Sir Harold Nicolsons book (Harcourt, Brace & Company, 1939), 
which was quite different in scope, intentions, and ideas. 

A leatherbound signed first edition of this book 
has been published by The Easton Press. 









CONTENTS 


1 The New World Order 17 

2 The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 29 

3 From Universality to Equilibrium: Richelieu, William of Orange, 

and Pitt 56 

4 The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 78 

5 Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 103 

6 Realpolitik Turns on Itself 137 

7 A Political Doomsday Machine: European Diplomacy Before the 

First World War 168 

8 Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 201 

9 The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of 

Versailles 218 

10 The Dilemmas of the Victors 246 

1 1 Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 266 

12 The End of Illusion: Hitler and the Destruction of 

Versailles 288 

13 Stalin’s Bazaar 332 

14 The Nazi-Soviet Pact 350 

15 America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 369 

16 Three Approaches to Peace: Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill in 

World War II 394 

17 The Beginning of the Cold War 423 

18 The Success and the Pain of Containment 446 

19 The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 473 

20 Negotiating with the Communists: Adenauer, Churchill, and 

Eisenhower 493 

21 Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 522 

22 Hungary: Upheaval in the Empire 550 



Contents 


23 Khrushchev’s Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 568 

24 Concepts of Western Unity: Macmillan, de Gaulle, Eisenhower, 

and Kennedy 594 

25 Vietnam: Entry into the Morass; Truman and Eisenhower 620 

26 Vietnam: On the Road to Despair; Kennedy and Johnson 643 

27 Vietnam: The Extrication; Nixon 674 

28 Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon’s Triangular 

Diplomacy 703 

29 Detente and Its Discontents 733 

30 The End of the Cold War: Reagan and Gorbachev 762 

31 The New World Order Reconsidered 804 

notes 837 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 873 
INDEX 877 


12 



List of Illustrations 


Page 6 
Page 10 


Page 17 
Page 29 

Page 56 
Page 78 
Page 103 
Page 137 
Page 168 
Page 201 

Page 218 


Page 246 


Page 266 

Page 288 
Page 332 


Page 350 


Page 369 
Page 394 


Woodrow Wilson addresses the Paris Peace Conference, 
January 25, 1919. 

Washington’s Farewell Address, manuscript detail. 

Inset: George Washington. Engraving after portrait by Gilbert 
Stuart. 

The United Nations General Assembly. 

Left: Theodore Roosevelt, August 1905- Right: Woodrow 
Wilson, July 1919- 

Left: William of Orange. Right: Cardinal Richelieu. 

Congress of Vienna, 1815. 

Left: Otto von Bismarck. Right: Napoleon III. 

Benjamin Disraeli. 

Emperor William II and Tsar Nicholas II. 

Left to right: Paul von Hindenburg, former Emperor William 
II, and Erich Ludendorff, 1917. 

Left to right: David Lloyd George, Vittorio Emmanuele 
Orlando, Georges Clemenceau, and Woodrow Wilson at 
Versailles, 1919. 

Left to right: Clemenceau, Wilson, Baron Sidney Sonnino, and 
Lloyd George after signing the Treaty of Versailles, June 28, 
1919. 

Hans Luther, Aristide Briand, and Gustav Stresemann {right) 
with German delegates at the League of Nations. 

Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini in Munich, 1937. 

Joseph Stalin and aides at first session of Supreme Soviet. 
Deputies, from left: Nikolai Bulganin, Andrei Zhdanov, Stalin, 
Kliment Voroshilov and Nikita Khrushchev, January 26, 1938. 
Vyacheslav Molotov signs Russo-German Nonaggression Pact, 
August 1939. In background are Joachim von Ribbentrop and 
Stalin. 

Franklin Roosevelt and Winston Churchill during Atlantic 
Charter meeting, August 1941. 

Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin at Yalta, February 1945. 



List of Illustrations 


Page 423 

Page 446 

Page 473 
Page 493 
Page 522 
Page 550 

Page 568 
Page 594 

Page 620 
Page 643 
Page 674 
Page 703 
Page 733 

Page 762 

Page 804 


Left: Churchill, Truman, and Stalin at Potsdam, 1945. Right: 
Clement Attlee, Truman, and Stalin at Potsdam, August 1945. 
John Foster Dulles with dignitaries after signing the Austrian 
State Treaty, May 1955. 

Dulles at the Korean front, June 1950. 

Dwight D. Eisenhower and Churchill in London, 1959- 
Khrushchev and Gamal Abdel Nasser in Moscow, 1958. 
Hungarian street fighters during Budapest uprising, October 
1956. 

John F. Kennedy and Khrushchev in Vienna, June 1961. 

Left: Kennedy and Harold Macmillan in Bermuda, December 
1961. Right: Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer in Bonn. 
French infantry at Dien Bien Phu, April 1954. 

Lyndon B. Johnson, December 1965. 

Henry Kissinger and Le Due Tho in Paris, January 1973. 
Leonid Brezhnev and Richard Nixon, June 1973- 
Gerald Ford with Anatoly Dobrynin {left) and Leonid 
Brezhnev {right) at Vladivostok, November 1974. 

Mikhail Gorbachev and Ronald Reagan in Geneva, November 
1985. 

Flags of the United States, Great Britain, France, Germany, 
China, Russia, Japan. 


14 



List of Maps 


Page 320 French Expansion from 1648 to 1801 
Page 321 German Expansion from 1919 to 1939 
Page 322 William Ill’s Grand Alliance from 1701 to 1713 
Page 323 Alliances in the 1950s 
Page 324 Europe After the Congress of Vienna, 1815 
Page 326 Europe on the Eve of the First World War, 1914 
Page 328 The Cold War World from 1945 to 1989 
Page 330 The Post-Cold War World 




CHAPTER ONE 

The New World Order 

Almost as if according to some natural law, in every century there seems 
to emerge a country with the power, the will, and the intellectual and 
moral impetus to shape the entire international system in accordance 
with its own values. In the seventeenth century, France under Cardinal 
Richelieu introduced the modern approach to international relations, 
based on the nation-state and motivated by national interest as its ultimate 
purpose. In the eighteenth century, Great Britain elaborated the concept 
of the balance of power, which dominated European diplomacy for the 
next 200 years. In the nineteenth century, Metternich’s Austria recon- 
structed the Concert of Europe and Bismarck’s Germany dismantled it, 
reshaping European diplomacy into a cold-blooded game of power poli- 
tics. 

In the twentieth century, no country has influenced international rela- 
tions as decisively and at the same time as ambivalently as the United 
States. No society has more firmly insisted on the inadmissibility of inter- 






Diplomacy 


vention in the domestic affairs of other states, or more passionately as- 
serted that its own values were universally applicable. No nation has been 
more pragmatic in the day-to-day conduct of its diplomacy, or more 
ideological in the pursuit of its historic moral convictions. No country 
has been more reluctant to engage itself abroad even while undertaking 
alliances and commitments of unprecedented reach and scope. 

The singularities that America has ascribed to itself throughout its his- 
tory have produced tw T o contradictory attitudes toward foreign policy. 
The first is that America serves its values best by perfecting democracy at 
home, thereby acting as a beacon for the rest of mankind; the second, 
that America’s values impose on it an obligation to crusade for them 
around the world. Torn between nostalgia for a pristine past and yearning 
for a perfect future, American thought has oscillated between isolationism 
and commitment, though, since the end of the Second World War, the 
realities of interdependence have predominated. 

Both schools of thought — of America as beacon and of America as 
crusader — envision as normal a global international order based on de- 
mocracy, free commerce, and international law. Since no such system has 
ever existed, its evocation often appears to other societies as utopian, if 
not naive. Still, foreign skepticism never dimmed the idealism of Wood- 
row Wilson, Franklin Roosevelt, or Ronald Reagan, or indeed of all other 
twentieth-century American presidents. If anything, it has spurred Amer- 
ica’s faith that history can be overcome and that if the world truly wants 
peace, it needs to apply America’s moral prescriptions. 

Both schools of thought were products of the American experience. 
Though other republics have existed, none had been consciously created 
to vindicate the idea of liberty. No other country’s population had chosen 
to head for a new continent and tame its wilderness in the name of 
freedom and prosperity for all. Thus the two approaches, the isolationist 
and the missionary, so contradictory on the surface, reflected a common 
underlying faith: that the United States possessed the world’s best system 
of government, and that the rest of mankind could attain peace and 
prosperity by abandoning traditional diplomacy and adopting America’s 
reverence for international law and democracy. 

America’s journey through international politics has been a triumph of 
faith over experience. Since the time America entered the arena of world 
politics in 1917, it has been so preponderant in strength and so convinced 
of the rightness of its ideals that this century’s major international 
agreements have been embodiments of American values — from the 
League of Nations and the Kellogg-Briand Pact to the United Nations 
Charter and the Helsinki Final Act. The collapse of Soviet communism 


18 



The New World Order 


marked the intellectual vindication of American ideals and, ironically, 
brought America face to face with the kind of world it had been seeking 
to escape throughout its history. In the emerging international order, 
nationalism has gained a new lease on life. Nations have pursued self- 
interest more frequently than high-minded principle, and have competed 
more than they have cooperated. There is little evidence to suggest that 
this age-old mode of behavior has changed, or that it is likely to change 
in the decades ahead. 

What is new about the emerging world order is that, for the first time, 
the United States can neither withdraw from the world nor dominate it. 
America cannot change the way it has perceived its role throughout its 
history, nor should it want to. When America entered the international 
arena, it was young and robust and had the power to make the world 
conform to its vision of international relations. By the end of the Second 
World War in 1945, the United States was so powerful (at one point about 
35 percent of the world’s entire economic production was American) 
that it seemed as if it was destined to shape the world according to its 
preferences. 

John F. Kennedy declared confidently in 1961 that America was strong 
enough to “pay any price, bear any burden” to ensure the success of 
liberty. Three decades later, the United States is in less of a position to 
insist on the immediate realization of all its desires. Other countries have 
grown into Great Power status. The United States now faces the challenge 
of reaching its goals in stages, each of which is an amalgam of American 
values and geopolitical necessities. One of the new necessities is that a 
world comprising several states of comparable strength must base its 
order on some concept of equilibrium — an idea with which the United 
States has never felt comfortable. 

When American thinking on foreign polio' and European diplomatic 
traditions encountered each other at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, 
the differences in historical experience became dramatically evident. The 
European leaders sought to refurbish the existing system according to 
familiar methods; the American peacemakers believed that the Great War 
had resulted not from intractable geopolitical conflicts but from flawed 
European practices. In his famous Fourteen Points, Woodrow Wilson told 
the Europeans that, henceforth, the international system should be based 
not on the balance of power but on ethnic self-determination, that their 
security should depend not on military alliances but on collective secu- 
rity, and that their diplomacy should no longer be conducted secretly by 
experts but on the basis of “open agreements, openly arrived at.” Clearly, 
Wilson had come not so much to discuss the terms for ending a war or 


19 



Diplomacy 


for restoring the existing international order, as he had to recast a whole 
system of international relations as it had been practiced for nearly three 
centuries. 

For as long as Americans have been reflecting on foreign policy, they 
have ascribed Europe’s travails to the balance-of-power system. And since 
the time Europe first had to concern itself with American foreign policy, 
its leaders have looked askance at America’s self-appointed mission of 
global reform. Each side has behaved as if the other had freely chosen its 
mode of diplomatic behavior and could have, were it wiser or less belli- 
cose, selected some other, more agreeable, method. 

In fact, both the American and the European approaches to foreign 
policy were the products of their own unique circumstances. Americans 
inhabited a nearly empty continent shielded from predatory powers by 
two vast oceans and with weak countries as neighbors. Since America 
confronted no power in need of being balanced, it could hardly have 
occupied itself with the challenges of equilibrium even if its leaders had 
been seized by the bizarre notion of replicating European conditions 
amidst a people who had turned their backs on Europe. 

The anguishing dilemmas of security that tormented European nations 
did not touch America for nearly 150 years. When they did, America twice 
participated in the world wars which had been started by the nations of 
Europe. In each instance, by the time America got involved, the balance 
of power had already failed to operate, producing this paradox: that 
the balance of power, which most Americans disdained, in fact assured 
American security as long as it functioned as it was designed; and that it 
was its breakdown that drew America into international politics. 

The nations of Europe did not choose the balance of power as the 
means for regulating their relations out of innate quarrelsomeness or an 
Old World love of intrigue. If the emphasis on democracy and interna- 
tional law was the product of America’s unique sense of security, Euro- 
pean diplomacy had been forged in the school of hard knocks. 

Europe was thrown into balance-of-power politics when its first choice, 
the medieval dream of universal empire, collapsed and a host of states of 
more or less equal strength arose from the ashes of that ancient aspira- 
tion. When a group of states so constituted are obliged to deal with one 
another, there are only two possible outcomes: either one state becomes 
so strong that it dominates all the others and creates an empire, or no 
state is ever quite powerful enough to achieve that goal. In the latter 
case, the pretensions of the most aggressive member of the international 
community are kept in check by a combination of the others; in other 
words, by the operation of a balance of power. 


20 



The New World Order 


The balance-of-power system did not purport to avoid crises or even 
wars. When working properly, it was meant to limit both the ability of 
states to dominate others and the scope of conflicts. Its goal was not peace 
so much as stability and moderation. By definition, a balance-of-power 
arrangement cannot satisfy every member of the international system 
completely; it works best when it keeps dissatisfaction below the level at 
which the aggrieved party will seek to overthrow the international order. 

Theorists of the balance of power often leave the impression that it is 
the natural form of international relations. In fact, balance-of-power sys- 
tems have existed only rarely in human history. The Western Hemisphere 
has never known one, nor has the territory of contemporary China since 
the end of the period of the warring states, over 2,000 years ago. For the 
greatest part of humanity and the longest periods of history, empire has 
been the typical mode of government. Empires have no interest in op- 
erating within an international system; they aspire to be the international 
system. Empires have no need for a balance of power. That is how the 
United States has conducted its foreign policy in the Americas, and China 
through most of its history in Asia. 

In the West, the only examples of functioning balance-of-power systems 
were among the city-states of ancient Greece and Renaissance Italy, and 
the European state system which arose out of the Peace of Westphalia in 
1648. The distinguishing feature of these systems was to elevate a fact of 
life — the existence of a number of states of substantially equal strength 
— into a guiding principle of world order. 

Intellectually, the concept of the balance of power reflected the convic- 
tions of all the major political thinkers of the Enlightenment. In their 
view, the universe, including the political sphere, operated according to 
rational principles which balanced each other. Seemingly random acts by 
reasonable men would, in their totality, tend toward the common good, 
though the proof of this proposition was elusive in the century of almost 
constant conflict that followed the Thirty Years’ War. 

Adam Smith, in The Wealth of Nations, maintained that an “invisible 
hand” would distill general economic well-being out of selfish individual 
economic actions. In The Federalist Papers, Madison argued that, in a 
large enough republic, the various political “factions” selfishly pursuing 
their own interests would, by a kind of automatic mechanism, forge a 
proper domestic harmony. The concepts of the separation of powers and 
of checks and balances, as conceived by Montesquieu and embodied in 
the American Constitution, reflected an identical view. The purpose of the 
separation of powers was to avoid despotism, not to achieve harmonious 
government; each branch of the government, in the pursuit of its own 


21 



Diplomacy 


interests, would restrain excess and thereby serve the common good. 
The same principles were applied to international affairs. By pursuing its 
own selfish interests, each state was presumed to contribute to progress, 
as if some unseen hand were guaranteeing that freedom of choice for 
each state assured well-being for all. 

For over a century, this expectation seemed to be fulfilled. After the 
dislocations caused by the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars, 
the leaders of Europe restored the balance of power at the Congress of 
Vienna in 1815 and softened the brutal reliance on power by seeking to 
moderate international conduct through moral and legal bonds. Yet by 
the end of the nineteenth century, the European balance-of-power system 
returned to the principles of power politics and in a far more unforgiving 
environment. Facing down the adversary became the standard method of 
diplomacy, leading to one test of strength after another. Finally, in 1914, 
a crisis arose from which no one shrank. Europe never fully recovered 
world leadership after the catastrophe of the First World War. The United 
States emerged as the dominant player but Woodrow Wilson soon made 
it clear that his country refused to play by European rules. 

At no time in its history has America participated in a balance-of-power 
system. Before the two world wars, America benefited from the operation 
of the balance of power without being involved in its maneuvers, and 
while enjoying the luxury of castigating it at will. During the Cold War, 
America was engaged in an ideological, political, and strategic struggle 
with the Soviet Union in which a two-power world operated according to 
principles quite different from those of a balance-of-power system. In a 
two-power world, there can be no pretense that conflict leads to the 
common good; any gain for one side is a loss for the other. Victory 
without war was in fact what America achieved in the Cold War, a victory 
which has now obliged it to confront the dilemma described by George 
Bernard Shaw: “There are two tragedies in life. One is to lose your heart’s 
desire. The other is to gain it.” 

American leaders have taken their values so much for granted that they 
rarely recognize how revolutionary and unsettling these values can ap- 
pear to others. No other society has asserted that the principles of ethical 
conduct apply to international conduct in the same way that they do to 
the individual — a notion that is the exact opposite of Richelieu’s raison 
d’etat. America has maintained that the prevention of war is as much a 
legal as a diplomatic challenge, and that what it resists is not change as 
such but the method of change, especially the use of force. A Bismarck 
or a Disraeli would have ridiculed the proposition that foreign policy is 
about method rather than substance, if indeed he had understood it. No 


22 



The New World Order 


nation has ever imposed the moral demands on itself that America has. 
And no country has so tormented itself over the gap between its moral 
values, which are by definition absolute, and the imperfection inherent 
in the concrete situations to which they must be applied. 

During the Cold War, the unique American approach to foreign policy 
was remarkably appropriate to the challenge at hand. There was a deep 
ideological conflict, and only one country, the United States, possessed 
the full panoply of means — political, economic, and military — to orga- 
nize the defense of the noncommunist world. A nation in such a position 
is able to insist on its views and can often avoid the problem facing the 
statesmen of less favored societies: that their means oblige them to pur- 
sue goals less ambitious than their hopes, and that their circumstances 
require them to approach even those goals in stages. 

In the Cold War world, the traditional concepts of power had substan- 
tially broken down. Most of history has displayed a synthesis of military, 
political, and economic strength, which in general has proved to be sym- 
metrical. In the Cold War period, the various elements of power became 
quite distinct. The former Soviet Union was a military superpower and at 
the same time an economic dwarf. It was also possible for a country to 
be an economic giant but to be militarily irrelevant, as was the case with 
Japan. 

In the post-Cold War world, the various elements are likely to grow 
more congruent and more symmetrical. The relative military power of 
the United States will gradually decline. The absence of a clear-cut adver- 
sary will produce domestic pressure to shift resources from defense to 
other priorities — a process which has already started. When there is no 
longer a single threat and each country perceives its perils from its own 
national perspective, those societies which had nestled under American 
protection will feel compelled to assume greater responsibility for their 
own security. Thus, the operation of the new international system will 
move toward equilibrium even in the military field, though it may take 
some decades to reach that point. These tendencies will be even more 
pronounced in economics, where American predominance is already 
declining, and where it has become safer to challenge the United States. 

The international system of the twenty-first century will be marked by 
a seeming contradiction: on the one hand, fragmentation; on the other, 
growing globalization. On the level of the relations among states, the new 
order will be more like the European state system of the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries than the rigid patterns of the Cold War. It will con- 
tain at least six major powers — the United States, Europe, China, Japan, 
Russia, and probably India — as well as a multiplicity of medium-sized 


23 



Diplomacy 


and smaller countries. At the same time, international relations have be- 
come truly global for the first time. Communications are instantaneous; 
the world economy operates on all continents simultaneously. A whole 
set of issues has surfaced that can only be dealt with on a worldwide 
basis, such as nuclear proliferation, the environment, the population ex- 
plosion, and economic interdependence. 

For America, reconciling differing values and very different historical 
experiences among countries of comparable significance will be a novel 
experience and a major departure from either the isolation of the last 
century or the de facto hegemony of the Cold War, in ways which this 
book seeks to illuminate. Equally, the other major players are facing 
difficulties in adjusting to the emerging world order. 

Europe, the only part of the modern world ever to operate a multistate 
system, invented the concepts of the nation-state, sovereignty, and the 
balance of power. These ideas dominated international affairs for the 
better part of three centuries. But none of Europe’s erstwhile prac- 
titioners of raison d’etat are now strong enough to act as principals in 
the emerging international order. They are attempting to compensate for 
this relative weakness by creating a unified Europe, an effort which ab- 
sorbs much of their energies. But even if they were to succeed, no auto- 
matic guidelines for the conduct of a unified Europe on the global stage 
would be at hand, since such a political entity has never existed before. 

Throughout its history, Russia has been a special case. It arrived late 
on the European scene — well after France and Great Britain had been 
consolidated — and none of the traditional principles of European diplo- 
macy seemed to apply to it. Bordering on three different cultural spheres 
— Europe, Asia, and the Muslim world — Russia contained populations of 
each, and hence was never a national state in the European sense. Con- 
stantly changing shape as its rulers annexed contiguous territories, Russia 
was an empire out of scale in comparison with any of the European 
countries. Moreover, with every new conquest, the character of the state 
changed as it incorporated another brand-new, restive, non-Russian eth- 
nic group. This was one of the reasons Russia felt obliged to maintain 
huge armies whose size was unrelated to any plausible threat to its exter- 
nal security. 

Torn between obsessive insecurity and proselytizing zeal, between the 
requirements of Europe and the temptations of Asia, the Russian Empire 
always had a role in the European equilibrium but was never emotionally 
a part of it. The requirements of conquest and of security became merged 
in the minds of Russian leaders. Since the Congress of Vienna, the Russian 
Empire has placed its military forces on foreign soil more often than any 


24 



The New World Order 


other major power. Analysts frequently explain Russian expansionism as 
stemming from a sense of insecurity. But Russian writers have far more 
often justified Russia’s outward thrust as a messianic vocation. Russia on 
the march rarely showed a sense of limits; thwarted, it tended to withdraw 
into sullen resentment. For most of its history, Russia has been a cause 
looking for opportunity. 

Postcommunist Russia finds itself within borders which reflect no his- 
torical precedent. Like Europe, it will have to devote much of its energy 
to redefining its identity. Will it seek to return to its historical rhythm and 
restore the lost empire? Will it shift its center of gravity eastward and 
become a more active participant in Asian diplomacy? By what principles 
and methods will it react to the upheavals around its borders, especially 
in the volatile Middle East? Russia will always be essential to world order 
and, in the inevitable turmoil associated with answering these questions, 
a potential menace to it. 

China too faces a world order that is new to it. For 2,000 years, the 
Chinese Empire had united its world under a single imperial rule. To be 
sure, that rule had faltered at times. Wars occurred in China no less 
frequently than they did in Europe. But since they generally took place 
among contenders for the imperial authority, they were more in the 
nature of civil rather than international wars, and, sooner or later, invari- 
ably led to the emergence of some new central power. 

Before the nineteenth century, China never had a neighbor capable of 
contesting its pre-eminence and never imagined that such a state could 
arise. Conquerors from abroad overthrew Chinese dynasties, only to be 
absorbed into Chinese culture to such an extent that they continued the 
traditions of the Middle Kingdom. The notion of the sovereign equality 
of states did not exist in China; outsiders were considered barbarians and 
were relegated to a tributary relationship — that was how the first British 
envoy to Beijing was received in the eighteenth century. China disdained 
sending ambassadors abroad but was not above using distant barbarians 
to overcome the ones nearby. Yet this was a strategy for emergencies, not 
a day-to-day operational system like the European balance of power, 
and it failed to produce the sort of permanent diplomatic establishment 
characteristic of Europe. After China became a humiliated subject of Euro- 
pean colonialism in the nineteenth century, it re-emerged only recently 
— since the Second World War — into a multipolar world unprecedented 
in its history. 

Japan had also cut itself off from all contact with the outside world. For 
500 years before it was forcibly opened by Commodore Matthew Perry in 
1854, Japan did not even deign to balance the barbarians off against each 


25 



Diplomacy 


other or to invent tributary relationships, as the Chinese had. Closed off 
from the outside world, Japan prided itself on its unique customs, grati- 
fied its military tradition by civil war, and rested its internal structure on 
the conviction that its unique culture was impervious to foreign influence, 
superior to it, and, in the end, would defeat it rather than absorb it. 

In the Cold War, when the Soviet Union was the dominant security 
threat, Japan was able to identify its foreign policy with America, thou- 
sands of miles away. The new world order, with its multiplicity of chal- 
lenges, will almost certainly oblige a country with so proud a past to 
re-examine its reliance on a single ally. Japan is bound to become more 
sensitive to the Asian balance of power than is possible for America, in a 
different hemisphere and facing in three directions — across the Atlantic, 
across the Pacific, and toward South America. China, Korea, and Southeast 
Asia will acquire quite a different significance for Japan than for the 
United States, and will inaugurate a more autonomous and more self- 
reliant Japanese foreign policy. 

As for India, which is now emerging as the major power in South Asia, 
its foreign policy is in many ways the last vestige of the heyday of Euro- 
pean imperialism, leavened by the traditions of an ancient culture. Before 
the arrival of the British, the subcontinent had not been ruled as a single 
political unit for millennia. British colonization was accomplished with 
small military forces because, at first, the local population saw these as 
the replacement of one set of conquerors by another. But after it estab- 
lished unified rule, the British Empire was undermined by the very values 
of popular government and cultural nationalism it had imported into 
India. Yet, as a nation-state, India is a newcomer. Absorbed by the struggle 
to feed its vast population, India dabbled in the Nonaligned movement 
during the Cold War. But it has yet to assume a role commensurate with 
its size on the international political stage. 

Thus, in effect, none of the most important countries which must build 
a new world order have had any experience with the multistate system 
that is emerging. Never before has a new world order had to be assem- 
bled from so many different perceptions, or on so global a scale. Nor has 
any previous order had to combine the attributes of the historic balance- 
of-power systems with global democratic opinion and the exploding tech- 
nology of the contemporary period. 

In retrospect, all international systems appear to have an inevitable 
symmetry. Once they are established, it is difficult to imagine how history 
might have evolved had other choices been made, or indeed whether any 
other choices had been possible. When an international order first comes 
into being, many choices may be open to it. But each choice constricts 


26 



The New World Order 


the universe of remaining options. Because complexity inhibits flexibility, 
early choices are especially crucial. Whether an international order is 
relatively stable, like the one that emerged from the Congress of Vienna, 
or highly volatile, like those that emerged from the Peace of Westphalia 
and the Treaty of Versailles, depends on the degree to which they recon- 
cile what makes the constituent societies feel secure with what they con- 
sider just. 

The two international systems that were the most stable — that of the 
Congress of Vienna and the one dominated by the United States after 
the Second World War — had the advantage of uniform perceptions. The 
statesmen at Vienna were aristocrats who saw intangibles in the same 
way, and agreed on fundamentals; the American leaders who shaped the 
postwar world emerged from an intellectual tradition of extraordinary 
coherence and vitality. 

The order that is now emerging will have to be built by statesmen who 
represent vastly different cultures. They run huge bureaucracies of such 
complexity that, often, the energy of these statesmen is more consumed 
by serving the administrative machinery than by defining a purpose. They 
rise to eminence by means of qualities that are not necessarily those 
needed to govern, and are even less suited to building an international 
order. And the only available model of a multistate system was one built 
by Western societies, which many of the participants may reject. 

Yet the rise and fall of previous world orders based on many states — 
from the Peace of Westphalia to our time — is the only experience on 
which one can draw in trying to understand the challenges facing contem- 
porary statesmen. The study of history offers no manual of instructions 
that can be applied automatically; history teaches by analogy, shedding 
light on the likely consequences of comparable situations. But each gen- 
eration must determine for itself which circumstances are in fact compa- 
rable. 

Intellectuals analyze the operations of international systems; statesmen 
build them. And there is a vast difference between the perspective of an 
analyst and that of a statesman. The analyst can choose which problem he 
wishes to study, whereas the statesman’s problems are imposed on him. 
The analyst can allot whatever time is necessary to come to a clear conclu- 
sion; the overwhelming challenge to the statesman is the pressure of 
time. The analyst runs no risk. If his conclusions prove wrong, he can 
write another treatise. The statesman is permitted only one guess; his 
mistakes are irretrievable. The analyst has available to him all the facts; 
he will be judged on his intellectual power. The statesman must act on 
assessments that cannot be proved at the time that he is making them; he 


27 



Diplomacy 


will be judged by history on the basis of how wisely he managed the 
inevitable change and, above all, by how well he preserves the peace. 
That is why examining how statesmen have dealt with the problem of 
world order — what worked or failed and why — is not the end of under- 
standing contemporary diplomacy, though it may be its beginning. 


28 



CHAPTER TWO 


The Hinge: 

Theodore Roosevelt or 
Woodrow Wilson 


Until early in this century, the isolationist tendency prevailed in Ameri- 
can foreign policy. Then, two factors projected America into world affairs: 
its rapidly expanding power, and the gradual collapse of the international 
system centered on Europe. Two watershed presidencies marked this 
progression: Theodore Roosevelts and Woodrow Wilson’s. These men 
held the reins of government when world affairs were drawing a reluctant 
nation into their vortex. Both recognized that America had a crucial role 
to play in world affairs though they justified its emergence from isolation 
with opposite philosophies. 

Roosevelt was a sophisticated analyst of the balance of power. He in- 


29 


Diplomacy 


sisted on an international role for America because its national interest 
demanded it, and because a global balance of power was inconceivable 
to him without American participation. For Wilson, the justification of 
America’s international role was messianic: America had an obligation, 
not to the balance of power, but to spread its principles throughout the 
world. During the Wilson Administration, America emerged as a key 
player in world affairs, proclaiming principles which, while reflecting 
the truisms of American thought, nonetheless marked a revolutionary 
departure for Old World diplomats. These principles held that peace 
depends on the spread of democracy, that states should be judged by the 
same ethical criteria as individuals, and that the national interest consists 
of adhering to a universal system of law. 

To hardened veterans of a European diplomacy based on the balance 
of power, Wilson’s views about the ultimately moral foundations of for- 
eign policy appeared strange, even hypocritical. Yet Wilsonianism has 
survived while history has bypassed the reservations of his contemporar- 
ies. Wilson was the originator of the vision of a universal world organiza- 
tion, the League of Nations, which would keep the peace through 
collective security rather than alliances. Though Wilson could not con- 
vince his own country of its merit, the idea lived on. It is above all to 
the drumbeat of Wilsonian idealism that American foreign policy has 
marched since his watershed presidency, and continues to march to this 
day. 

America’s singular approach to international affairs did not develop all 
at once, or as the consequence of a solitary inspiration. In the early 
years of the Republic, American foreign policy was in fact a sophisticated 
reflection of the American national interest, which was, simply, to fortify 
the new nation’s independence. Since no European country was capable 
of posing an actual threat so long as it had to contend with rivals, the 
Founding Fathers showed themselves quite ready to manipulate the de- 
spised balance of power when it suited their needs; indeed, they could 
be extraordinarily skillful at maneuvering between France and Great Brit- 
ain not only to preserve America’s independence but to enlarge its fron- 
tiers. Because they really wanted neither side to win a decisive victory in 
the wars of the French Revolution, they declared neutrality. Jefferson 
defined the Napoleonic Wars as a contest between the tyrant on the land 
(France) and the tyrant of the ocean (England) 1 — in other words, the 
parties in the European struggle were morally equivalent. Practicing an 
early form of nonalignment, the new nation discovered the benefit of 
neutrality as a bargaining tool, just as many an emerging nation has since. 

At the same time, the United States did not carry its rejection of Old 


30 



The Hinge.- Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


World ways to the point of forgoing territorial expansion. On the con- 
trary, from the very beginning, the United States pursued expansion in the 
Americas with extraordinary singleness of purpose. After 1794, a series of 
treaties settled the borders with Canada and Florida in Americas favor, 
opened the Mississippi River to American trade, and began to establish 
an American commercial interest in the British West Indies. This culmi- 
nated in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803, which brought to the young 
country a huge, undefined territory west of the Mississippi River from 
France along with claims to Spanish territory in Florida and Texas — the 
foundation from which to develop into a great power. 

The French Emperor who made the sale, Napoleon Bonaparte, ad- 
vanced an Old World explanation for such a one-sided transaction: “This 
accession of territory affirms forever the power of the United States, and 
I have just given England a maritime rival that sooner or later will lay low 
her pride.” 2 American statesmen did not care what justification France 
used to sell her possessions. To them, condemnation of Old World power 
politics did not appear inconsistent with American territorial expansion 
across North America. For they considered America’s westward thrust as 
America’s internal affair rather than as a matter of foreign policy. 

In this spirit, James Madison condemned war as the germ of all evils — 
as the precursor of taxes and armies and all other “instruments for bring- 
ing the many under the domination of the few.” 3 His successor, James 
Monroe, saw no contradiction in defending westward expansion on the 
ground that it was necessary to turn America into a great power: 

It must be obvious to all, that the further the expansion is carried, 
provided it be not beyond the just limit, the greater will be the freedom 
of action to both [state and federal] Governments, and the more perfect 
their security; and, in all other respects, the better the effect will be to 
the whole American people. Extent of territory, whether it be great or 
small, gives to a nation many of its characteristics. It marks the extent 
of its resources, of its population, of its physical force. It marks, in short, 
the difference between a great and a small power . 4 

Still, while occasionally using the methods of European power politics, 
the leaders of the new nation remained committed to the principles 
that had made their country exceptional. The European powers fought 
innumerable wars to prevent potentially dominant powers from arising. 
In America, the combination of strength and distance inspired a confi- 
dence that any challenge could be overcome after it had presented itself. 
European nations, with much narrower margins of survival, formed coali- 


31 



Diplomacy 


dons against the possibility of change; America was sufficiently remote to 
gear its policy to resisting the actuality of change. 

This was the geopolitical basis of George Washington’s warning against 
“entangling” alliances for any cause whatsoever. It would be unwise, he 
said, 

to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary vicissitudes of 
her [European] politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of 
her friendships or enmities. Our detached and distant situation invites 
and enables us to pursue a different course . 5 


The new nation did not treat Washington’s advice as a practical, geopoliti- 
cal judgment but as a moral maxim. As the repository of the principle of 
liberty, America found it natural to interpret the security conferred on it 
by great oceans as a sign of divine providence, and to attribute its actions 
to superior moral insight instead of to a margin of security not shared by 
any other nation. 

A staple of the early Republic’s foreign policy was the conviction that 
Europe’s constant wars were the result of its cynical methods of statecraft. 
Whereas the European leaders based their international system on the 
conviction that harmony could be distilled from a competition of selfish 
interests, their American colleagues envisioned a world in which states 
would act as cooperative partners, not as distrustful rivals. American lead- 
ers rejected the European idea that the morality of states should be 
judged by different criteria than the morality of individuals. According to 
Jefferson, there existed 

but one system of ethics for men and for nations — to be grateful, to be 
faithful to all engagements under all circumstances, to be open and 
generous, promoting in the long run even the interests of both . 6 


The righteousness of America’s tone — at times so grating to foreigners — 
reflected the reality that America had in fact rebelled not simply against 
the legal ties that had bound it to the old country but against Europe’s 
system and values. America ascribed the frequency of European wars to 
the prevalence of governmental institutions which denied the values of 
freedom and human dignity. “As war is the system of government on the 
old construction,” wrote Thomas Paine, “the animosity which nations 
reciprocally entertain, is nothing more than what the policy of their gov- 
ernments excites, to keep up the spirit of the system — Man is not the 


32 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


enemy of man, but through the medium of a false system of govern- 
ment .” 7 

The idea that peace depends above all on promoting democratic insti- 
tutions has remained a staple of American thought to the present day. 
Conventional American wisdom has consistently maintained that democ- 
racies do not make war against each other. Alexander Hamilton, for one, 
challenged the premise that republics were essentially more peaceful 
than other forms of government: 

Sparta, Athens, Rome, and Carthage were all republics; two of them, 
Athens and Carthage, of the commercial kind. Yet were they as often 
engaged in wars, offensive and defensive, as the neighboring monar- 
chies of the same times In the government of Britain the representa- 
tives of the people compose one branch of the national legislature. 
Commerce has been for ages the predominant pursuit of that country. 
Few nations, nevertheless, have been more frequently engaged in 
war. . . , 8 

Hamilton, however, represented a tiny minority. The overwhelming 
majority of America’s leaders were as convinced then as they are now that 
America has a special responsibility to spread its values as its contribution 
to world peace. Then, as now, disagreements had to do with method. 
Should America actively promote the spread of free institutions as a prin- 
cipal objective of its foreign policy? Or should it rely on the impact of its 
example? 

The dominant view in the early days of the Republic was that the 
nascent American nation could best serve the cause of democracy by 
practicing its virtues at home. In the words of Thomas Jefferson, a “just 
and solid republican government” in America would be “a standing mon- 
ument and example” for all the peoples of the world . 9 A year later, 
Jefferson returned to the theme that America was, in effect, “acting for all 
mankind”: 

. . . that circumstances denied to others, but indulged to us, have im- 
posed on us the duty of proving what is the degree of freedom and 
self-government in which a society may venture to leave its individual 
members . 10 

The emphasis American leaders placed on the moral foundations of 
America’s conduct and on its significance as a symbol of freedom led to 
a rejection of the truisms of European diplomacy: that the balance of 


33 



Diplomacy 


power distilled an ultimate harmony out of the competition of selfish 
interests; and that security considerations overrode the principles of civil 
law; in other words, that the ends of the state justified the means. 

These unprecedented ideas were being put forward by a country which 
was prospering throughout the nineteenth century, its institutions in 
good working order and its values vindicated. America was aware of no 
conflict between high-minded principle and the necessities of survival. In 
time, the invocation of morality as the means for solving international 
disputes produced a unique kind of ambivalence and a very American 
type of anguish. If Americans were obliged to invest their foreign policy 
with the same degree of rectitude as they did their personal lives, how 
was security to be analyzed; indeed, in the extreme, did this mean that 
survival was subordinate to morality? Or did America’s devotion to free 
institutions confer an automatic aura of morality on even the most seem- 
ingly self-serving acts? And if this was true, how did it differ from the 
European concept of raison d’etat, which asserted that a state’s actions 
can only be judged by their success? 

Professors Robert Tucker and David Hendrickson brilliantly analyzed 
this ambivalence in American thought: 

The great dilemma of Jefferson’s statecraft lay in his apparent renuncia- 
tion of the means on which states had always ultimately relied to ensure 
their security and to satisfy their ambitions, and his simultaneous un- 
willingness to renounce the ambitions that normally led to the use of 
these means. He wished, in other words, that America could have it 
both ways — that it could enjoy the fruits of power without falling victim 
to the normal consequences of its exercise. 11 


To this day, the push and pull of these two approaches has been one of 
the major themes of American foreign policy. By 1820, the United States 
found a compromise between the two approaches which enabled it to 
have it both ways until after the Second World War. It continued to 
castigate what went on across the oceans as the reprehensible result of 
balance-of-power politics while treating its own expansion across North 
America as “manifest destiny.” 

Until the turn of the twentieth century, American foreign policy was 
basically quite simple: to fulfill the country’s manifest destiny, and to 
remain free of entanglements overseas. America favored democratic gov- 
ernments wherever possible, but abjured action to vindicate its prefer- 
ences. John Quincy Adams, then Secretary of State, summed up this 
attitude in 1821: 


34 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


Wherever the standard of freedom and independence has been or shall 
be unfurled, there will her [Americas] heart, her benedictions and her 
prayers be. But she goes not abroad, in search of monsters to destroy. 
She is the well-wisher to the freedom and independence of all. She is 
the champion and vindicator only of her own. 12 


The reverse side of this policy of American self-restraint was the decision 
to exclude European power politics from the Western Hemisphere, if 
necessary by using some of the methods of European diplomacy. The 
Monroe Doctrine, which proclaimed this policy, arose from the attempt 
of the Holy Alliance — composed of Prussia, Russia, and Austria — to sup- 
press the revolution in Spain in the 1820s. Opposed to intervention in 
domestic affairs in principle, Great Britain was equally unwilling to coun- 
tenance the Holy Alliance in the Western Hemisphere. 

British Foreign Secretary George Canning proposed joint action to the 
United States in order to keep Spains colonies in the Americas out of the 
grasp of the Holy Alliance. He wanted to make sure that, regardless of 
what happened in Spain, no European power controlled Latin America. 
Deprived of its colonies, Spain would not be much of a prize, Canning 
reasoned, and this would either discourage intervention or make it irrele- 
vant. 

John Quincy Adams understood the British theory, but did not trust 
British motives. It was too soon after the 1812 British occupation of 
Washington for America to side with the erstwhile mother country. Ac- 
cordingly, Adams urged President Monroe to exclude European colonial- 
ism from the Americas as a unilateral American decision. 

The Monroe Doctrine, proclaimed in 1823, made a moat of the ocean 
which separated the United States from Europe. Up to that time, the 
cardinal rule of American foreign policy had been that the United States 
would not become entangled in European struggles for power. The Mon- 
roe Doctrine went the next step by declaring that Europe must not be- 
come entangled in American affairs. And Monroe’s idea of what 
constituted American affairs — the whole Western Hemisphere — was ex- 
pansive indeed. 

The Monroe Doctrine, moreover, did not limit itself to declarations of 
principle. Daringly, it warned the European powers that the new nation 
would go to war to uphold the inviolability of the Western Hemisphere. 
It declared that the United States would regard any extension of European 
power “to any portion of this hemisphere as dangerous to our peace and 
safety.” 13 

Finally, in language less eloquent but more explicit than that of his 


35 



Diplomacy 


Secretary of State two years earlier, President Monroe abjured any inter- 
vention in European controversies: “In the wars of the European powers 
in matters relating to themselves we have never taken any part, nor does 
it comport with our policy so to do .” 14 

America was at one and the same time turning its back on Europe, and 
freeing its hands to expand in the Western Hemisphere. Under the um- 
brella of the Monroe Doctrine, America could pursue policies which were 
not all that different from the dreams of any European king — expanding 
its commerce and influence, annexing territory — in short, turning itself 
into a Great Power without being required to practice power politics. 
America’s desire for expansion and its belief that it was a more pure and 
principled country than any in Europe never clashed. Since it did not 
regard its expansion as foreign policy, the United States could use its 
power to prevail — over the Indians, over Mexico, in Texas — and to do so 
in good conscience. In a nutshell, the foreign policy of the United States 
was not to have a foreign policy. 

Like Napoleon with respect to the Louisiana Purchase, Canning had a 
right to boast that he had brought the New World into being to redress 
the balance of the Old, for Great Britain indicated that it would back the 
Monroe Doctrine with the Royal Navy. America, however, would redress 
the European balance of power only to the extent of keeping the Holy 
Alliance out of the Western Hemisphere. For the rest, the European pow- 
ers would have to maintain their equilibrium without American participa- 
tion. 

For the rest of the century, the principal theme of American foreign 
policy was to expand the application of the Monroe Doctrine. In 1823, 
the Monroe Doctrine had warned the European powers to keep out of the 
Western Hemisphere. By the time of the Monroe Doctrine s centennial, its 
meaning had been gradually expanded to justify American hegemony in 
the Western Hemisphere. In 1845, President Polk explained the incorpo- 
ration of Texas into the United States as necessary to prevent an indepen- 
dent state from becoming “an ally or dependency of some foreign nation 
more powerful than herself’ and hence a threat to American security. 15 
In other words, the Monroe Doctrine justified American intervention not 
only against an existing threat but against any possibility of an oven 
challenge — much as the European balance of power did. 

The Civil War briefly interrupted America’s preoccupation with territo- 
rial expansion. Washington’s primary foreign-policy concern now was to 
prevent the Confederacy from being recognized by European nations lest 
a multistate system emerge on the soil of Nonh America and with it the 
balance-of-power politics of European diplomacy. But by 1868, President 


36 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


Andrew Johnson was back at the old stand of justifying expansion by the 
Monroe Doctrine, this time in the purchase of Alaska: 

Foreign possession or control of those communities has hitherto hin- 
dered the growth and impaired the influence of the United States. 

Chronic revolution and anarchy there would be equally injurious. 16 

Something more fundamental than expansion across the American conti- 
nent was taking place, though it went practically unnoticed by the so- 
called Great Powers — a new member was joining their club as the United 
States became the worlds most powerful nation. By 1885, the United 
States had surpassed Great Britain, then considered the world’s major 
industrial power, in manufacturing output. By the turn of the century, it 
was consuming more energy than Germany, France, Austria-Hungary, 
Russia, Japan, and Italy combined. 17 Between the Civil War and the turn 
of the century, American coal production rose by 800 percent, steel rails 
by 523 percent, railway track mileage by 567 percent, and wheat produc- 
tion by 256 percent. Immigration contributed to the doubling of the 
American population. And the process of growth was likely to accelerate. 

No nation has ever experienced such an increase in its power without 
seeking to translate it into global influence. America’s leaders were 
tempted. President Andrewjohnson’s Secretary of State, Seward, dreamed 
of an empire including Canada and much of Mexico and extending deep 
into the Pacific. The Grant Administration wanted to annex the Dominican 
Republic and toyed with the acquisition of Cuba. These were the kinds of 
initiatives which contemporary European leaders, Disraeli or Bismarck, 
would have understood and approved of. 

But the American Senate remained focused on domestic priorities and 
thwarted all expansionist projects. It kept the army small (25,000 men) 
and the navy weak. Until 1890, the American army ranked fourteenth in 
the world, after Bulgaria’s, and the American navy was smaller than Italy’s 
even though America’s industrial strength was thirteen times that of Italy. 
America did not participate in international conferences and was treated 
as a second-rank power. In 1880, when Turkey reduced its diplomatic 
establishment, it eliminated its embassies in Sweden, Belgium, the Neth- 
erlands, and the United States. At the same time, a German diplomat in 
Madrid offered to take a cut in salary rather than be posted to Washing- 
ton. 18 

But once a country has reached the level of power of post-Civil War 
America, it will not forever resist the temptation of translating it into a 
position of importance in the international arena. In the late 1880s, 


37 



Diplomacy 


America began to build up its navy, which, as late as 1880, was smaller 
than Chile’s, Brazil’s, or Argentina’s. By 1889, Secretary of the Navy Benja- 
min Tracy was lobbying for a battleship navy and the contemporary naval 
historian Alfred Thayer Mahan developed a rationale for it. 19 

Though in fact the British Royal Navy protected America from depreda- 
tions by European powers, American leaders did not perceive Great Brit- 
ain as their country’s protector. Throughout the nineteenth century, Great 
Britain was considered the greatest challenge to American interests, and 
the Royal Navy the most serious strategic threat. No wonder that, when 
America began to flex its muscles, it sought to expel Great Britain’s influ- 
ence from the Western Hemisphere, invoking the Monroe Doctrine 
which Great Britain had been so instrumental in encouraging. 

The United States was none too delicate about the challenge. In 1895, 
Secretary of State Richard Olney invoked the Monroe Doctrine to warn 
Great Britain with a pointed reference to the inequalities of power. 
“To-day,” he wrote, “the United States is practically sovereign on this 
continent, and its fiat is law upon the subjects to which it confines its 
interposition.” America’s “infinite resources combined with its isolated 
position render it master of the situation and practically invulnerable as 
against any or all other powers.” 20 America’s renunciation of power poli- 
tics clearly did not apply to the Western Hemisphere. By 1902, Great 
Britain had abandoned its claim to a major role in Central America. 

Supreme in the Western Hemisphere, the United States began to enter 
the wider arena of international affairs. America had grown into a world 
power almost despite itself. Expanding across the continent, it had estab- 
lished its pre-eminence all around its shores while insisting that it had no 
wish to conduct the foreign policy of a Great Power. At the end of the 
process, America found itself commanding the son of power which made 
it a major international factor, no matter what its preferences. America’s 
leaders might continue to insist that its basic foreign policy was to serve 
as a “beacon” for the rest of mankind, but there could be no denying that 
some of them were also becoming aware that America’s power entitled it 
to be heard on the issues of the day, and that it did not need to wait 
until all of mankind had become democratic to make itself a part of the 
international system. 

No one articulated this reasoning more trenchantly than Theodore 
Roosevelt. He was the first president to insist that it was America’s duty to 
make its influence felt globally, and to relate America to the world in 
terms of a concept of national interest. Like his predecessors, Roosevelt 
was convinced of America’s beneficent role in the world. But unlike them, 
Roosevelt held that America had real foreign policy interests that went far 


38 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


beyond its interest in remaining unentangled. Roosevelt started from the 
premise that the United States was a power like any other, not a singular 
incarnation of virtue. If its interests collided with those of other countries, 
America had the obligation to draw on its strength to prevail. 

As a first step, Roosevelt gave the Monroe Doctrine its most interven- 
tionist interpretation by identifying it with imperialist doctrines of the 
period. In what he called a “Corollary” to the Monroe Doctrine, he pro- 
claimed on December 6, 1904, a general right of intervention by “some 
civilized nation” which, in the Western Hemisphere, the United States 
alone had a right to exercise: . . in the Western Hemisphere the adher- 
ence of the United States to the Monroe Doctrine may force the United 
States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrong-doing or im- 
potence, to the exercise of an international police power.” 21 

Roosevelt’s practice preceded his preaching. In 1902, America had 
forced Haiti to clear up its debts with European banks. In 1903, it fanned 
unrest in Panama into a full-scale insurrection. With American help, the 
local population wrested independence from Colombia, but not before 
Washington had established the Canal Zone under United States sover- 
eignty on both sides of what was to become the Panama Canal. In 1905, 
the United States established a financial protectorate over the Dominican 
Republic. And in 1906, American troops occupied Cuba. 

For Roosevelt, muscular diplomacy in the Western Hemisphere was 
pan of America’s new global role. The two oceans were no longer wide 
enough to insulate America from the rest of the world. The United States 
had to become an actor on the international stage. Roosevelt said as much 
in a 1902 message to the Congress: “More and more, the increasing 
interdependence and complexity of international political and economic 
relations render it incumbent on all civilized and orderly powers to insist 
on the proper policing of the world.” 22 

Roosevelt commands a unique historical position in America’s ap- 
proach to international relations. No other president defined America’s 
world role so completely in terms of national interest, or identified the 
national interest so comprehensively with the balance of power. Roose- 
velt shared the view of his countrymen, that America was the best hope 
for the world. But unlike most of them, he did not believe that it could 
preserve the peace or fulfill its destiny simply by practicing civic virtues. 
In his perception of the nature of world order, he was much closer to 
Palmerston or Disraeli than to Thomas Jefferson. 

A great president must be an educator, bridging the gap between his 
people’s future and its experience. Roosevelt taught an especially stern 
doctrine for a people brought up in the belief that peace is the normal 


39 



Diplomacy 


condition among nations, that there is no difference between personal 
and public morality, and that America was safely insulated from the up- 
heavals affecting the rest of the world. For Roosevelt rebutted each of 
these propositions. To him, international life meant struggle, and Dar- 
win’s theory of the survival of the fittest was a better guide to history than 
personal morality. In Roosevelt’s view, the meek inherited the earth only 
if they were strong. To Roosevelt, America was not a cause but a great 
power — potentially the greatest. He hoped to be the president destined 
to usher his nation onto the world scene so that it might shape the 
twentieth century in the way Great Britain had dominated the nineteenth 
— as a country of vast strengths which had enlisted itself, with moderation 
and wisdom, to work on behalf of stability, peace, and progress. 

Roosevelt was impatient with many of the pieties which dominated 
American thinking on foreign policy. He disavowed the efficacy of inter- 
national law. What a nation could not protect by its own power could not 
be safeguarded by the international community. He rejected disarma- 
ment, which was just then emerging as an international topic: 

As yet there is no likelihood of establishing any kind of international 
power . . . which can effectively check wrong-doing, and in these cir- 
cumstances it would be both foolish and an evil thing for a great and 
free nation to deprive itself of the power to protect its own rights and 
even in exceptional cases to stand up for the rights of others. Nothing 
would more promote iniquity . . . than for the free and enlightened 
peoples , . . deliberately to render themselves powerless while leaving 
every despotism and barbarism armed . 23 

Roosevelt was even more scathing when it came to talk about world 
government: 

I regard the Wilson-Bryan attitude of trusting to fantastic peace treaties, 
to impossible promises, to all kinds of scraps of paper without any 
backing in efficient force, as abhorrent. It is infinitely better for a nation 
and for the world to have the Frederick the Great and Bismarck tradi- 
tion as regards foreign policy than to have the Bryan or Bryan-Wilson 
attitude as a permanent national attitude A milk-and-water righ- 

teousness unbacked by force is to the full as wicked as and even more 
mischievous than force divorced from righteousness . 24 

In a world regulated by power, Roosevelt believed that the natural order 
of things was reflected in the concept of “spheres of influence,” which 
assigned preponderant influence over large regions to specific powers, 


40 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


for example, to the United States in the Western Hemisphere or to Great 
Britain on the Indian subcontinent. In 1908, Roosevelt acquiesced to the 
Japanese occupation of Korea because, to his way of thinking, Japanese- 
Korean relations had to be determined by the relative power of each 
country, not by the provisions of a treaty or by international law: 

Korea is absolutely Japan’s. To be sure, by treaty it was solemnly cove- 
nanted that Korea should remain independent. But Korea was itself 
helpless to enforce the treaty, and it was out of the question to suppose 
that any other nation . . . would attempt to do for the Koreans what they 
were utterly unable to do for themselves . 25 

With Roosevelt holding such European-style views, it was not surprising 
that he approached the global balance of power with a sophistication 
matched by no other American president and approached only by Richard 
Nixon. Roosevelt at first saw no need to engage America in the specifics 
of the European balance of power because he considered it more or less 
self-regulating. But he left little doubt that, if such a judgment were to 
prove wrong, he would urge America to engage itself to re-establish the 
equilibrium. Roosevelt gradually came to see Germany as a threat to the 
European balance and began to identify America’s national interest with 
those of Great Britain and France. 

This was demonstrated in 1906, during the Algeciras Conference, the 
purpose of which was to settle the future of Morocco. Germany, which 
insisted on an “open door” to forestall French domination, urged the 
inclusion of an American representative, because it believed America to 
have significant trading interests there. In the event, the American consul 
in Morocco attended, but the role he played disappointed the Germans. 
Roosevelt subordinated America’s commercial interests — which in any 
event were not large — to his geopolitical view. These were expressed by 
Henry Cabot Lodge in a letter to Roosevelt at the height of the Moroccan 
crisis. “France,” he said, “ought to be with us and England — in our zone 
and our combination. It is the sound arrangement economically and 
politically.” 26 

Whereas in Europe, Roosevelt considered Germany the principal 
threat, in Asia he was concerned with Russian aspirations and thus favored 
Japan, Russia’s principal rival. “There is no nation in the world which, 
more than Russia, holds in its hands the fate of the coming years,” Roose- 
velt declared. 27 In 1904, Japan, protected by an alliance with Great Britain, 
attacked Russia. Though Roosevelt proclaimed American neutrality, he 
leaned toward Japan. A Russian victory, he argued, would be “a blow to 


41 



Diplomacy 


civilization.” 28 And when Japan destroyed the Russian fleet, he rejoiced: 
“I was thoroughly pleased with the Japanese victory, for Japan is playing 
our game.” 29 

He wanted Russia to be weakened rather than altogether eliminated 
from the balance of power — for, according to the maxims of balance-of- 
power diplomacy, an excessive weakening of Russia would have merely 
substituted a Japanese for the Russian threat. Roosevelt perceived that the 
outcome which served America best would be one in which Russia 
“should be left face to face with Japan so that each may have a moderative 
action on the other.” 30 

On the basis of geopolitical realism rather than high-minded altruism, 
Roosevelt invited the two belligerents to send representatives to his 
Oyster Bay home to work out a peace treaty that limited the Japanese 
victory and preserved equilibrium in the Far East. As a result, Roosevelt 
became the first American to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, for 
producing a settlement based on maxims like balance of power and 
spheres of influence which, after his successor, Wilson, would appear 
quite un-American. 

In 1914, Roosevelt initially took a relatively clinical view of Germany’s 
invasion of Belgium and Luxembourg, though it was in flagrant violation 
of treaties which had established the neutrality of these two countries: 

I am not taking sides one way or the other as concerns the violation or 
disregard of these treaties. When giants are engaged in a death wrestle, 
as they reel to and fro they are certain to trample on whoever gets in the 
way of either of the huge, straining combatants, unless it is dangerous to 
do so. 51 

A few months after the outbreak of war in Europe, Roosevelt reversed 
his initial judgment about the violation of Belgian neutrality, though, 
characteristically, it was not the illegality of the German invasion that 
concerned him but the threat it posed to the balance of power: . . do 
you not believe that if Germany won in this war, smashed the English 
Fleet and destroyed the British Empire, within a year or two she would 
insist upon taking the dominant position in South and Central 
America . . . ?” 32 

He urged massive rearmament so that America might throw its weight 
behind the Triple Entente. He regarded a German victory as both possible 
and dangerous for the United States. A victory for the Central Powers 
would have forfeited the protection of the British Royal Navy, permitting 
German imperialism to assert itself in the Western Hemisphere. 


41 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


That Roosevelt should have considered British naval control of the 
Atlantic safer than German hegemony was due to such intangible non- 
power factors as cultural affinity and historical experience. Indeed, there 
were strong cultural ties between England and America for which there 
was no counterpart in U.S.-German relations. Moreover, the United States 
was used to Great Britain ruling the seas and was comfortable with the 
idea, and no longer suspected Great Britain of expansionist designs in 
the Americas. Germany, however, was regarded with apprehension. On 
October 3, 1914, Roosevelt wrote to the British ambassador to Washing- 
ton (conveniently forgetting his earlier judgment about the inevitability 
of Germany’s disregard of Belgian neutrality) that: 

If I had been President, I should have acted [against Germany] on the 
thirtieth or thirty-first of July. 33 

In a letter to Rudyard Kipling a month later, Roosevelt admitted to the 
difficulty of bringing American power to bear on the European war on 
the basis of his convictions. The American people were unwilling to 
follow a course of action cast so strictly in terms of power politics: 

If I should advocate all that I myself believe, I would do no good among 
our people, because they would not follow me. Our people are short- 
sighted, and they do not understand international matters. Your people 
have been short-sighted, but they are not as short-sighted as ours in 

these matters Thanks to the width of the ocean, our people believe 

that they have nothing to fear from the present contest, and that they 
have no responsibility concerning it. 34 

Had American thinking on foreign policy culminated in Theodore Roose- 
velt, it would have been described as an evolution adapting traditional 
principles of European statecraft to the American condition. Roosevelt 
would have been seen as the president who was in office when the United 
States, having established a dominant position in the Americas, began to 
make its weight felt as a world power. But American foreign-policy think- 
ing did not end with Roosevelt, nor could it have done so. A leader who 
confines his role to his people’s experience dooms himself to stagnation; 
a leader who outstrips his people’s experience runs the risk of not being 
understood. Neither its experience nor its values prepared America for 
the role assigned to it by Roosevelt. 

In one of history’s ironies, America did in the end fulfill the leading 
role Roosevelt had envisioned for it, and within Roosevelt’s lifetime, but 


43 



Diplomacy 


it did so on behalf of principles Roosevelt derided, and under the guid- 
ance of a president whom Roosevelt despised. Woodrow Wilson was the 
embodiment of the tradition of American exceptionalism, and originated 
what would become the dominant intellectual school of American foreign 
policy — a school whose precepts Roosevelt considered at best irrelevant 
and at worst inimical to America’s long-range interests. 

In terms of all established principles of statecraft, Roosevelt had by 
far the better of the argument between these two of Americas greatest 
presidents. Nevertheless, it was Wilson who prevailed: a century later, 
Roosevelt is remembered for his achievements, but it was Wilson who 
shaped American thought. Roosevelt understood how international poli- 
tics worked among the nations then conducting world affairs — no Ameri- 
can president has had a more acute insight into the operation of 
international systems. Yet Wilson grasped the mainsprings of American 
motivation, perhaps the principal one being that America simply did not 
see itself as a nation like any other. It lacked both the theoretical and the 
practical basis for the European-style diplomacy of constant adjustment 
of the nuances of power from a posture of moral neutrality for the sole 
purpose of preserving an ever-shifting balance. Whatever the realities and 
the lessons of power, the American people’s abiding conviction has been 
that its exceptional character resides in the practice and propagation of 
freedom. 

Americans could be moved to great deeds only through a vision that 
coincided with their perception of their country as exceptional. However 
intellectually attuned to the way the diplomacy of the Great Powers actu- 
ally operated, Roosevelt’s approach failed to persuade his countrymen 
that they needed to enter the First World War. Wilson, on the other 
hand, tapped his people’s emotions with arguments that were as morally 
elevated as they were largely incomprehensible to foreign leaders. 

Wilson’s was an astonishing achievement. Rejecting power politics, he 
knew how to move the American people. An academic who arrived in 
politics relatively late, he was elected due to a split in the Republican Party 
between Taft and Roosevelt. Wilson grasped that America’s instinctive 
isolationism could be overcome only by an appeal to its belief in the 
exceptional nature of its ideals. Step by step, he took an isolationist coun- 
try into war, after he had first demonstrated his Administration’s devotion 
to peace by a passionate advocacy of neutrality. And he did so while 
abjuring any selfish national interests, and by affirming that America 
sought no other benefit than vindication of its principles. 

In Wilson’s first State of the Union Address, on December 2, 1913, he 
laid down the outline of what later came to be known as Wilsonianism. 


44 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


Universal law and not equilibrium, national trustworthiness and not na- 
tional self-assertion were, in Wilsons view, the foundations of interna- 
tional order. Recommending the ratification of several treaties of 
arbitration, Wilson argued that binding arbitration, not force, should be- 
come the method for resolving international disputes: 

There is only one possible standard by which to determine controver- 
sies between the United States and other nations, and that is com- 
pounded of these two elements: Our own honor and our obligations 
to the peace of the world. A test so compounded ought easily to be 
made to govern both the establishment of new treaty obligations and 
the interpretation of those already assumed . 35 

Nothing annoyed Roosevelt as much as high-sounding principles backed 
by neither the power nor the will to implement them. He wrote to a 
friend: “If I must choose between a policy of blood and iron and one of 
milk and water . . . why I am for the policy of blood and iron. It is better 
not only for the nation but in the long run for the world.” 36 

By the same token, Roosevelt’s proposal to respond to the war in 
Europe by increasing defense spending made no sense to Wilson. In his 
second State of the Union address on December 8, 1914, and after the 
European war had been raging for four months, Wilson rejected an in- 
crease in America’s armaments, because this would signal that “we had 
lost our self-possession” as the result of a war “whose causes cannot 
touch us, whose very existence affords us opportunities for friendship 
and disinterested service ” 37 

America’s influence, in Wilson’s view, depended on its unselfishness; it 
had to preserve itself so that, in the end, it could step forward as a 
credible arbiter between the warring parties. Roosevelt had asserted that 
the war in Europe, and especially a German victory, would ultimately 
threaten American security. Wilson maintained that America was essen- 
tially disinterested, hence should emerge as mediator. Because of Amer- 
ica’s faith in values higher than the balance of power, the war in Europe 
now afforded it an extraordinary opportunity to proselytize for a new and 
better approach to international affairs. 

Roosevelt ridiculed such ideas and accused Wilson of pandering to 
isolationist sentiments to help his re-election in 1916. In fact, the thrust 
of Wilson’s policy was quite the opposite of isolationism. What Wilson 
was proclaiming was not America’s withdrawal from the world but the 
universal applicability of its values and, in time, America’s commitment 
to spreading them. Wilson restated what had become the conventional 


45 



Diplomacy 


American wisdom since Jefferson, but put it in the service of a crusading 
ideology: 

• America’s special mission transcends day-to-day diplomacy and obliges 
it to serve as a beacon of liberty for the rest of mankind. 

• The foreign policies of democracies are morally superior because the 
people are inherently peace-loving. 

• Foreign policy should reflect the same moral standards as personal 
ethics. 

• The state has no right to claim a separate morality for itself. 

Wilson endowed these assertions of American moral exceptionalism 
with a universal dimension: 

Dread of the power of any other nation we are incapable of. We are not 
jealous of rivalry in the fields of commerce or of any other peaceful 
achievement. We mean to live our own lives as we will; but we mean 
also to let live. We are, indeed, a true friend to all the nations of the 
world, because we threaten none, covet the possessions of none, desire 
the overthrow of none . 38 

No other nation has ever rested its claim to international leadership on 
its altruism. All other nations have sought to be judged by the compatibil- 
ity of their national interests with those of other societies. Yet, from 
Woodrow Wilson through George Bush, American presidents have in- 
voked their country’s unselfishness as the crucial attribute of its leader- 
ship role. Neither Wilson nor his later disciples, through the present, 
have been willing to face the fact that, to foreign leaders imbued with less 
elevated maxims, America’s claim to altruism evokes a certain aura of 
unpredictability; whereas the national interest can be calculated, altruism 
depends on the definition of its practitioner. 

To Wilson, however, the altruistic nature of American society was proof 
of divine favor: 

It was as if in the Providence of God a continent had been kept unused 
and waiting for a peaceful people who loved liberty and the rights of 
men more than they loved anything else, to come and set up an un- 
selfish commonwealth . 39 

The claim that American goals represented providential dispensation im- 
plied a global role for America that would prove far more sweeping than 


46 



The Hinge. Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


any Roosevelt had ever imagined. For he had wanted no more than to 
improve the balance of power and to invest America’s role in it with 
the importance commensurate with its growing strength. In Roosevelt’s 
conception, America would have been one nation among many — more 
powerful than most and part of an elite group of great powers — but still 
subject to the historic ground rules of equilibrium. 

Wilson moved America onto a plane entirely remote from such consid- 
erations. Disdaining the balance of power, he insisted that America’s role 
was “not to prove . . . our selfishness, but our greatness.” 40 If that was 
true, America had no right to hoard its values for itself. As early as 1915, 
Wilson put forward the unprecedented doctrine that the security of 
America was inseparable from the security of all the rest of mankind. 
This implied that it was henceforth America’s duty to oppose aggression 
everywhere: 


. . . because we demand unmolested development and the undisturbed 
government of our own lives upon our own principles of right and 
liberty, we resent, from whatever quarter it may come, the aggression 
we ourselves will not practice. We insist upon security in prosecuting 
our self-chosen lines of national development. We do more than that. 
We demand it also for others. We do not confine our enthusiasm for 
individual liberty and free national development to the incidents and 
movements of affairs which affect only ourselves. We feel it wherever 
there is a people that tries to walk in these difficult paths of indepen- 
dence and right. 41 


Envisioning America as a beneficent global policeman, this foreshadowed 
the containment policy, which would be developed after the Second 
World War. 

Even at his most exuberant, Roosevelt would never have dreamt of so 
sweeping a sentiment portending global interventionism. But, then, he 
was the warrior-statesman; Wilson was the prophet-priest. Statesmen, 
even warriors, focus on the world in which they live; to prophets, the 
“real” world is the one they want to bring into being. 

Wilson transformed what had started out as a reaffirmation of American 
neutrality into a set of propositions laying the foundations for a global 
crusade. In Wilson’s view, there was no essential difference between 
freedom for America and freedom for the world. Proving that the time 
spent in faculty meetings, where hairsplitting exegesis reigns supreme, 
had not been wasted, he developed an extraordinary interpretation of 
what George Washington had really meant when he warned against for- 


47 



Diplomacy 


eign entanglements. Wilson redefined “foreign” in a way that would 
surely have astonished the first president. What Washington meant, ac- 
cording to Wilson, was that America must avoid becoming entangled in 
the purposes of others. But, Wilson argued, nothing that concerns human- 
ity “can be foreign or indifferent to us .” 42 Hence America had an unlim- 
ited charter to involve itself abroad. 

What extraordinary conceit to derive a charter for global intervention 
from a Founding Father’s injunction against foreign entanglements, and 
to elaborate a philosophy of neutrality that made involvement in war 
inevitable! As Wilson edged his country ever closer to the world war by 
articulating his visions of a better world, he evoked a vitality and an 
idealism that seemed to justify Americas hibernation for a century just so 
it could now enter the international arena with a dynamism and an inno- 
cence unknown to its more seasoned partners. European diplomacy had 
been hardened, and humbled, in the crucible of history; its statesmen 
saw events through the prism of many dreams proved fragile, of high 
hopes dashed and ideals lost to the fragility of human foresight. America 
knew no such limitations, boldly proclaiming, if not the end of history, 
then surely its irrelevance, as it moved to transform values heretofore 
considered unique to America into universal principles applicable to all. 
Wilson was thus able to overcome, at least for a time, the tension in 
American thinking between America the secure and America the unsul- 
lied. America could only approach entry into World War I as an engage- 
ment on behalf of peoples everywhere, not just itself, and in the role of 
the crusader for universal liberties. 

Germany’s announcement of unrestricted submarine warfare and its 
sinking of the Lusitania became the proximate cause of America’s decla- 
ration of war. But Wilson did not justify America’s entry into the war on 
the grounds of specific grievances. National interests were irrelevant; 
Belgium’s violation and the balance of power had nothing to do with it. 
Rather, the war had a moral foundation, whose primary objective was a 
new and more just international order. “It is a fearful thing,” Wilson 
reflected in the speech asking for a declaration of war, 


to lead this great peaceful people into war, into the most terrible and 
disastrous of all wars, civilization itself seeming to be in the balance. 
But right is more precious than peace, and we shall fight for the things 
which we have always carried nearest our hearts, for democracy, for 
the right of those who submit to authority to have a voice in their own 
governments, for the rights and liberties of small nations, for a universal 
dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace 
and safety to all nations and make the world itself at last free . 43 


48 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


In a war on behalf of such principles, there could be no compromise. 
Total victory was the only valid goal. Roosevelt would almost certainly 
have expressed America’s war aims in political and strategic terms; 
Wilson, flaunting American disinterest, defined America’s war aims in 
entirely moral categories. In Wilson’s view, the war was not the conse- 
quence of clashing national interests pursued without restraint, but of 
Germany’s unprovoked assault on the international order. More specifi- 
cally, the true culprit was not the German nation, but the German Em- 
peror himself. In urging a declaration of war, Wilson argued: 

We have no quarrel with the German people. We have no feeling 
towards them but one of sympathy and friendship. It was not upon 
their impulse that their government acted in entering this war. It was 
not with their previous knowledge or approval. It was a war determined 
upon as wars used to be determined upon in the old, unhappy days 
when peoples were nowhere consulted by their rulers and wars were 
provoked and waged in the interest of dynasties . 44 

Though William II had long been regarded as a loose cannon on the 
European stage, no European statesman had ever advocated deposing 
him; nobody had viewed the overthrow of the Emperor or of his dynasty 
as the key to peace in Europe. But once the issue of Germany’s domestic 
structure had been advanced, the war could no longer end in the sort of 
compromise balancing conflicting interests that Roosevelt had achieved 
between Japan and Russia ten years earlier. On January 22, 1917, before 
America had entered the war, Wilson proclaimed its goal to be “peace 
without victory.” 45 What Wilson proposed, however, when America did 
enter the war was a peace achievable only by total victory. 

Wilson’s pronouncements soon became conventional wisdom. Even as 
experienced a figure as Herbert Hoover began to describe the German 
ruling class as inherently wicked, preying “upon the life blood of other 
peoples.” 46 The mood of the times was aptly expressed by Jacob Schur- 
man, President of Cornell University, who saw the war as a struggle 
between the “Kingdom of Heaven” and the “Kingdom of Hun-land, which 
is force and frightfulness.” 47 

Yet the overthrow of a single dynasty could not possibly bring about 
all that Wilson’s rhetoric implied. In urging a declaration of war, Wilson 
extended his moral reach to the entire world; not only Germany but all 
other nations had to be made safe for democracy; for peace would re- 
quire “a partnership of democratic nations.” 48 In another speech, Wilson 
went even further by saying that America’s power would atrophy unless 
the United States spread freedom around the globe: 


49 



Diplomacy 


We set this Nation up to make men free, and we did not confine our 
conception and purpose to America, and now we will make men free. 

If we did not do that, all the fame of America would be gone, and all 
her power would be dissipated. 49 

The closest Wilson ever came to stating his war aims in detail was in the 
Fourteen Points, which will be dealt with in chapter 9. Wilson’s historic 
achievement lies in his recognition that Americans cannot sustain major 
international engagements that are not justified by their moral faith. His 
downfall was in treating the tragedies of history as aberrations, or as due 
to the shortsightedness and the evil of individual leaders, and in his 
rejection of any objective basis for peace other than the force of public 
opinion and the worldwide spread of democratic institutions. In the pro- 
cess, he would ask the nations of Europe to undertake something for 
which they were neither philosophically nor historically prepared, and 
right after a war which had drained them of substance. 

For 300 years, the European nations had based their world order on a 
balancing of national interests, and their foreign policies on a quest for 
security, treating every additional benefit as a bonus. Wilson asked the 
nations of Europe to base their foreign policy on moral convictions, 
leaving security to result incidentally, if at all. But Europe had no concep- 
tual apparatus for such a disinterested policy, and it still remained to be 
seen whether America, having just emerged from a century of isolation, 
could sustain the permanent involvement in international affairs that Wil- 
son’s theories implied. 

Wilson’s appearance on the scene was a watershed for America, one of 
those rare examples of a leader who fundamentally alters the course of 
his country’s history. Had Roosevelt or his ideas prevailed in 1912, the 
question of war aims would have been based on an inquiry into the 
nature of American national interest. Roosevelt would have rested Amer- 
ica’s entry into the war on the proposition — which he in fact advanced — 
that, unless America joined the Triple Entente, the Central Powers would 
win the war and, sooner or later, pose a threat to American security. 

The American national interest, so defined, would, over time, have led 
America to adopt a global policy comparable to Great Britain’s toward 
Continental Europe. For three centuries, British leaders had operated 
from the assumption that, if Europe’s resources were marshaled by a 
single dominant power, that country would then have the resources to 
challenge Great Britain’s command of the seas, and thus threaten its 
independence. Geopolitically, the United States, also an island off the 
shores of Eurasia, should, by the same reasoning, have felt obliged to 


50 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


resist the domination of Europe or Asia by any one power and, even 
more, the control of both continents by the same power. In these terms, 
it should have been the extent of Germany’s geopolitical reach and not 
its moral transgressions that provided the principal casus belli 

However, such an Old World approach ran counter to the wellspring 
of American emotions being tapped by Wilson — as it does to this day. 
Not even Roosevelt could have managed the power politics he advocated, 
though he died convinced that he could have. At any rate, Roosevelt was 
no longer the president, and Wilson had made it clear, even before 
America entered the war, that he would resist any attempt to base the 
postwar order on established principles of international politics. 

Wilson saw the causes of the war not only in the wickedness of the 
German leadership but in the European balance-of-power system as well. 
On January 22, 1917, he attacked the international order which had pre- 
ceded the war as a system of “organized rivalries”: 

The question upon which the whole future peace and policy of the 
world depends is this: Is the present war a struggle for a just and secure 
peace, or only for a new balance of power? . . . There must be, not a 
balance of power, but a community of power; not organized rivalries, 
but an organized common peace. 50 

What Wilson meant by “community of power” was an entirely new con- 
cept that later became known as “collective security” (though William 
Gladstone in Great Britain had put forward a stillborn variation of it in 
the course of 1880). 51 Convinced that all the nations of the world had an 
equal interest in peace and would therefore unite to punish those who 
disturbed it, Wilson proposed to defend the international order by the 
moral consensus of the peace-loving: 

. . . this age is an age . . . which rejects the standards of national selfish- 
ness that once governed the counsels of nations and demands that they 
shall give way to a new order of things in which the only questions will 
be: “Is it right?” “Is it just?” “Is it in the interest of mankind?” 52 


To institutionalize this consensus, Wilson put forward the League of Na- 
tions, a quintessential^ American institution. Under the auspices of this 
world organization, power would yield to morality and the force 
of arms to the dictates of public opinion. Wilson kept emphasizing that, 
had the public been adequately informed, the war would never have 
occurred — ignoring the passionate demonstrations of joy and relief 


51 



Diplomacy 


which had greeted the onset of war in all capitals, including those of 
democratic Great Britain and France. If the new theory was to work, in 
Wilson’s view, at least two changes in international governance had to 
take place: first, the spread of democratic governments throughout the 
world, and, next, the elaboration of a ‘new and more wholesome diplo- 
macy” based on “the same high code of honor that we demand of individ- 
uals.” 53 

In 1918, Wilson stated as a requirement of peace the hitherto unheard- 
of and breathtakingly ambitious goal of “the destruction of every arbitrary 
power anywhere that can separately, secretly and of its single choice 
disturb the peace of the world; or, if it cannot be presently destroyed, at 
the least its reduction to virtual impotence.” 54 A League of Nations so 
composed and animated by such attitudes would resolve crises without 
war, Wilson told the Peace Conference on February 14, 1919: 

. . . throughout this instrument [the League Covenant] we are depending 
primarily and chiefly upon one great force, and that is the moral force 
of the public opinion of the world — the cleansing and clarifying and 
compelling influences of publicity ... so that those things that are de- 
stroyed by the light may be properly destroyed by the overwhelming 
light of the universal expression of the condemnation of the world. 55 

The preservation of peace would no longer spring from the traditional 
calculus of power but from worldwide consensus backed up by a policing 
mechanism. A universal grouping of largely democratic nations would act 
as the “trustee of peace,” and replace the old balance-of-power and alli- 
ance systems. 

Such exalted sentiments had never before been put forward by any 
nation, let alone been implemented. Nevertheless, in the hands of Ameri- 
can idealism they were turned into the common currency of national 
thinking on foreign policy. Every American president since Wilson has 
advanced variations of Wilson’s theme. Domestic debates have more often 
dealt with the failure to fulfill Wilson’s ideals (soon so commonplace that 
they were no longer even identified with him) than with whether they 
were in fact lending adequate guidance in meeting the occasionally brutal 
challenges of a turbulent world. For three generations, critics have sav- 
aged Wilson’s analysis and conclusions; and yet, in all this time, Wilson’s 
principles have remained the bedrock of American foreign-policy think- 
ing. 

And yet Wilson’s intermingling of power and principle also set the 
stage for decades of ambivalence as the American conscience tried to 
reconcile its principles with its necessities. The basic premise of collective 


52 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


security was that all nations would view every threat to security in the 
same way and be prepared to run the same risks in resisting it. Not only 
had nothing like it ever actually occurred, nothing like it was destined to 
occur in the entire history of both the League of Nations and the United 
Nations. Only when a threat is truly overwhelming and genuinely affects 
all, or most, societies is such a consensus possible — as it was during the 
two world wars and, on a regional basis, in the Cold War. But in the vast 
majority of cases — and in nearly all of the difficult ones — the nations of 
the world tend to disagree either about the nature of the threat or about 
the type of sacrifice they are prepared to make to meet it. This was the 
case from Italy’s aggressions against Abyssinia in 1935 to the Bosnian 
crisis in 1992. And when it has been a matter of achieving positive objec- 
tives or remedying perceived injustices, global consensus has proved 
even more difficult to achieve. Ironically, in the post-Cold War world, 
which has no overwhelming ideological or military threat and which pays 
more lip service to democracy than has any previous era, these difficulties 
have only increased. 

Wilsonianism also accentuated another latent split in American thought 
on international affairs. Did America have any security interests it needed 
to defend regardless of the methods by which they were challenged? Or 
should America resist only changes which could fairly be described as 
illegal? Was it the fact or the method of international transformation 
that concerned America? Did America reject the principles of geopolitics 
altogether? Or did they need to be reinterpreted through the filter of 
American values? And if these should clash, which would prevail? 

The implication of Wilsonianism has been that America resisted, above 
all, the method of change, and that it had no strategic interests worth 
defending if they were threatened by apparently legal methods. As late as 
the Gulf War, President Bush insisted that he was not so much defending 
vital oil supplies as resisting the principle of aggression. And during the 
Cold War, some of the domestic American debate concerned the question 
whether America, with all its failings, had a moral right to organize resis- 
tance to the Moscow threat. 

Theodore Roosevelt would have had no doubt as to the answer to these 
questions. To assume that nations would perceive threats identically or 
be prepared to react to them uniformly represented a denial of every- 
thing he had ever stood for. Nor could he envision any world organiza- 
tion to which victim and aggressor could comfortably belong at the same 
time. In November 1918, he wrote in a letter: 

I am for such a League provided we don’t expect too much from it 

I am not willing to play the part which even Aesop held up to derision 


53 



Diplomacy 


when he wrote of how the wolves and the sheep agreed to disarm, and 
how the sheep as a guarantee of good faith sent away the watchdogs, 
and were then forthwith eaten by the wolves. 56 

The following month, he wrote this to Senator Knox of Pennsylvania: 

The League of Nations may do a little good, but the more pompous it is 
and the more it pretends to do, the less it will really accomplish. The 
talk about it has a grimly humorous suggestion of the talk about the 
Holy Alliance a hundred years ago, which had as its main purpose the 
perpetual maintenance of peace. The Czar Alexander by the way, was 
the President Wilson of this particular movement a century ago. 57 

In Roosevelt’s estimation, only mystics, dreamers, and intellectuals held 
the view that peace was man’s natural condition and that it could be 
maintained by disinterested consensus. To him, peace was inherently 
fragile and could be preserved only by eternal vigilance, by the arms of 
the strong, and by alliances among the like-minded. 

But Roosevelt lived either a century too late or a century too early. His 
approach to international affairs died with him in 1919; no significant 
school of American thought on foreign policy has invoked him since. On 
the other hand, it is surely the measure of Wilson’s intellectual triumph 
that even Richard Nixon, whose foreign policy in fact embodied many of 
Roosevelt’s precepts, considered himself above all a disciple of Wilson’s 
internationalism, and hung a portrait of the wartime president in the 
Cabinet Room. 

The League of Nations failed to take hold in America because the 
country was not yet ready for so global a role. Nevertheless, Wilson’s 
intellectual victory proved more seminal than any political triumph could 
have been. For, whenever America has faced the task of constructing a 
new world order, it has returned in one way or another to Woodrow 
Wilson’s precepts. At the end of World War II, it helped build the United 
Nations on the same principles as those of the League, hoping to found 
peace on a concord of the victors. When this hope died, America waged 
the Cold War not as a conflict between two superpowers but as a moral 
struggle for democracy. When communism collapsed, the Wilsonian idea 
that the road to peace lay in collective security, coupled with the world- 
wide spread of democratic institutions, was adopted by administrations 
of both major American political parties. 

In Wilsonianism was incarnate the central drama of America on the 
world stage: America’s ideology has, in a sense, been revolutionary while, 


54 



The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 


domestically, Americans have considered themselves satisfied with the 
status quo. Tending to turn foreign-policy issues into a struggle between 
good and evil, Americans have generally felt ill at ease with compromise, 
as they have with partial or inconclusive outcomes. The fact that America 
has shied away from seeking vast geopolitical transformations has often 
associated it with defense of the territorial, and sometimes the political, 
status quo. Trusting in the rule of law, it has found it difficult to reconcile 
its faith in peaceful change with the historical fact that almost all signifi- 
cant changes in history have involved violence and upheaval. 

America found that it would have to implement its ideals in a world 
less blessed than its own and in concert with states possessed of narrower 
margins of survival, more limited objectives, and far less self-confidence. 
And yet America has persevered. The postwar world became largely 
America’s creation, so that, in the end, it did come to play the role Wilson 
had envisioned for it — as a beacon to follow, and a hope to attain. 


55 



CHAPTER THREE 


From Universality 
to Equilibrium: 
Richelieu, William of Orange, 

and Pitt 


What historians describe today as the European balance-of-power sys- 
tem emerged in the seventeenth century from the final collapse of the 
medieval aspiration to universality — a concept of world order that repre- 
sented a blending of the traditions of the Roman Empire and the Catholic 
Church. The w 7 orld was conceived as mirroring the Heavens. Just as one 
God ruled in Heaven, so one emperor would rule over the secular world, 
and one pope over the Universal Church. 

In this spirit, the feudal states of Germany and Northern Italy were 
grouped under the rule of the Holy Roman Emperor. Into the seven- 
teenth century, this empire had the potential to dominate Europe. France, 
whose frontier was far west of the Rhine River, and Great Britain were 
peripheral states with respect to it. Had the Holy Roman Emperor ever 
succeeded in establishing central control over all the territories techni- 


56 


From Universality to Equilibrium 


cally under his jurisdiction, the relations of the Western European states 
to it might have been similar to those of China’s neighbors to the Middle 
Kingdom, with France comparable to Vietnam or Korea, and Great Britain 
to Japan. 

For most of the medieval period, however, the Holy Roman Emperor 
never achieved that degree of central control. One reason was the lack of 
adequate transportation and communication systems, making it difficult 
to tie together such extensive territories. But the most important reason 
was that the Holy Roman Empire had separated control of the church 
from control of the government. Unlike a pharaoh or a caesar, the Holy 
Roman Emperor was not deemed to possess divine attributes. Every- 
where outside Western Europe, even in the regions governed by the 
Eastern Church, religion and government were unified in the sense that 
key appointments to each were subject to the central government; reli- 
gious authorities had neither the means nor the authority to assert the 
autonomous position demanded by Western Christianity as a matter of 
right. 

In Western Europe, the potential and, from time to time, actual conflict 
between pope and emperor established the conditions for eventual con- 
stitutionalism and the separation of powers which are the basis of modern 
democracy. It enabled the various feudal rulers to enhance their auton- 
omy by exacting a price from both contending factions. This, in turn, led 
to a fractionated Europe — a patchwork of duchies, counties, cities, and 
bishoprics. Though in theory all the feudal lords owed fealty to the em- 
peror, in practice they did what they pleased. Various dynasties claimed 
the imperial crown, and central authority almost disappeared. The emper- 
ors maintained the old vision of universal rule without any possibility of 
realizing it. At the fringes of Europe, France, Great Britain, and Spain did 
not accept the authority of the Holy Roman Empire, though they re- 
mained part of the Universal Church. 

Not until the Habsburg dynasty had laid near-permanent claim to the 
imperial crown in the fifteenth century and, through prudent marriages, 
acquired the Spanish crown and its vast resources, did it become possible 
for the Holy Roman Emperor to aspire to translate his universal claims 
into a political system. In the first half of the sixteenth century, Emperor 
Charles V revived the imperial authority to a point which raised the 
prospect of a Central European empire, composed of what is today Ger- 
many, Austria, Northern Italy, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, East- 
ern France, Belgium, and the Netherlands — a grouping so potentially 
dominant as to prevent the emergence of anything resembling the Euro- 
pean balance of power. 

At that very moment, the weakening of the Papacy under the impact of 


57 



Diplomacy 


the Reformation thwarted the prospect of a hegemonic European empire. 
When strong, the Papacy had been a thorn in the side of the Holy Roman 
Emperor and a formidable rival. When on the decline in the sixteenth 
century, the Papacy proved equally a bane to the idea of empire. Emper- 
ors wanted to see themselves, and wanted others to see them, as the 
agents of God. But in the sixteenth century, the emperor came to be 
perceived in Protestant lands less as an agent of God than as a Viennese 
warlord tied to a decadent pope. The Reformation gave rebellious princes 
a new freedom of action, in both the religious and the political realms. 
Their break with Rome was a break with religious universality; their 
struggle with the Habsburg emperor demonstrated that the princes no 
longer saw fealty to the empire as a religious duty. 

With the concept of unity collapsing, the emerging states of Europe 
needed some principle to justify their heresy and to regulate their rela- 
tions. They found it in the concepts of raison d’etat and the balance of 
power. Each depended on the other. Raison d’etat asserted that the well- 
being of the state justified whatever means were employed to further 
it; the national interest supplanted the medieval notion of a universal mo- 
rality. The balance of power replaced the nostalgia for universal mon- 
archy with the consolation that each state, in pursuing its own selfish 
interests, would somehow contribute to the safety and progress of all the 
others. 

The earliest and most comprehensive formulation of this new approach 
came from France, which was also one of the first nation-states in Europe. 
France was the country that stood to lose the most by the reinvigoration 
of the Holy Roman Empire, because it might well — to use modern termi- 
nology — have been “Finlandized” by it. As religious restraints weakened, 
France began to exploit the rivalries that the Reformation had generated 
among its neighbors. French rulers recognized that the progressive weak- 
ening of the Holy Roman Empire (and even more its disintegration) 
would enhance France’s security and, with good fortune, enable it to 
expand eastward. 

The principal agent for this French policy was an improbable figure, a 
prince of the Church, Armand Jean du Plessis, Cardinal de Richelieu, First 
Minister of France from 1624 to 1642. Upon learning of Cardinal Riche- 
lieu’s death, Pope Urban VIII is alleged to have said, “If there is a God, 
the Cardinal de Richelieu will have much to answer for. If not . . . well, he 
had a successful life.” 1 This ambivalent epitaph would no doubt have 
pleased the statesman, who achieved vast successes by ignoring, and 
indeed transcending, the essential pieties of his age. 

Few statesmen can claim a greater impact on history. Richelieu was the 
father of the modern state system. He promulgated the concept of raison 


58 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


d'etat and practiced it relentlessly for the benefit of his own country. 
Under his auspices, raison d’etat replaced the medieval concept of uni- 
versal moral values as the operating principle of French policy. Initially, 
he sought to prevent Habsburg domination of Europe, but ultimately left 
a legacy that for the next two centuries tempted his successors to establish 
French primacy in Europe. Out of the failure of these ambitions, a balance 
of power emerged, first as a fact of life, then as a system for organizing 
international relations. 

Richelieu came into office in 1624, when the Habsburg Holy Roman 
Emperor Ferdinand II was attempting to revive Catholic universality, 
stamp out Protestantism, and establish imperial control over the princes 
of Central Europe. This process, the Counter-Reformation, led to what 
was later called the Thirty Years’ War, which erupted in Central Europe 
in 1618 and turned into one of the most brutal and destructive wars in 
the history of mankind. 

By 1618, the German-speaking territory of Central Europe, most of 
which was part of the Holy Roman Empire, was divided into two armed 
camps — the Protestants and the Catholics. The fuse that set off the war 
was lit that same year in Prague, and before long all of Germany was 
drawn into the conflict. As Germany was progressively bled white, its 
principalities became easy prey for outside invaders. Soon Danish and 
Swedish armies were cutting their way through Central Europe, and even- 
tually the French army joined the fray. By the time the war ended in 1648, 
Central Europe had been devastated and Germany had lost almost a third 
of its population. In the crucible of this tragic conflict, Cardinal Richelieu 
grafted the principle of raison d’etat onto French foreign policy, a princi- 
ple that the other European states adopted in the century that followed. 

As a prince of the Church, Richelieu ought to have welcomed Ferdi- 
nand’s drive to restore Catholic orthodoxy. But Richelieu put the French 
national interest above any religious goals. His vocation as cardinal did 
not keep Richelieu from seeing the Habsburg attempt to re-establish the 
Catholic religion as a geopolitical threat to France’s security. To him, it 
was not a religious act but a political maneuver by Austria to achieve 
dominance in Central Europe and thereby to reduce France to second- 
class status. 

Richelieu’s fear was not without foundation. A glance at the map of 
Europe shows that France was surrounded by Habsburg lands on all 
sides: Spain to the south; the Northern Italian city-states, dominated 
mostly by Spain, in the southeast; Franche-Comtd (today the region 
around Lyon and Savoy), also under Spanish control, in the east, and the 
Spanish Netherlands in the north. The few frontiers not under the rule of 
the Spanish Habsburgs were subject to the Austrian branch of the family. 


59 



Diplomacy 


The Duchy of Lorraine owed fealty to the Austrian Holy Roman Emperor, 
as did strategically important areas along the Rhine in what is present-day 
Alsace. If Northern Germany were also to fall under Habsburg rule, 
France would become perilously weak in relation to the Holy Roman 
Empire. 

Richelieu derived little comfort from the fact that Spain and Austria 
shared France’s Catholic faith. Quite to the contrary, a victory for the 
Counter-Reformation was exactly what Richelieu was determined to pre- 
vent. In pursuit of what would today be called a national security interest 
and was then labeled — for the first time — raison d’etat, Richelieu was 
prepared to side with the Protestant princes and exploit the schism within 
the Universal Church. 

Had the Habsburg emperors played according to the same rules or 
understood the emerging world of raison d’etat, they would have seen 
how well placed they were to achieve what Richelieu feared most — the 
pre-eminence of Austria and the emergence of the Holy Roman Empire 
as the dominant power on the Continent. Through the centuries, how- 
ever, the enemies of the Habsburgs benefited from the dynasty’s rigidity 
in adjusting to tactical necessities or understanding future trends. The 
Habsburg rulers were men of principle. They never compromised their 
convictions except in defeat. At the start of this political odyssey, there- 
fore, they were quite defenseless against the ruthless Cardinal’s machina- 
tions. 

Emperor Ferdinand II, Richelieu’s foil, had almost certainly never 
heard of raison d’etat. Even if he had, he would have rejected it as 
blasphemy, for he saw his secular mission as carrying out the will of God, 
and always stressed the “holy” in his title as Holy Roman Emperor. Never 
would he have conceded that divine ends could be achieved by less than 
moral means. Never would he have thought of concluding treaties with 
the Protestant Swedes or the Muslim Turks, measures which the Cardinal 
pursued as a matter of course. Ferdinand’s adviser, the Jesuit Lamormaini, 
thus summarized the Emperor’s outlook: 

The false and corrupt policies, which are widespread in these times, 
he, in his wisdom, condemned from the start. He held that those who 
followed such policies could not be dealt with, since they practice 
falsehood and misuse God and religion. It would be a great folly for 
one to try to strengthen a kingdom, which God alone has granted, with 
means that God hates. 2 

A ruler committed to such absolute values found it impossible to compro- 
mise, let alone to manipulate, his bargaining position. In 1596, while still 


60 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


an archduke, Ferdinand declared, “I would rather die than grant any 
concessions to the sectarians when it comes to religion.” 3 To the detri- 
ment of his empire, he certainly lived up to his words. Since he was less 
concerned with the Empire’s welfare than with obeisance to the will of 
God, he considered himself duty-bound to crush Protestantism even 
though some accommodation with it clearly would have been in his best 
interests. In modern terms, he was a fanatic. The words of one of the 
imperial advisers, Caspar Scioppius, highlight the Emperor’s beliefs: 
“Woe to the king who ignores the voice of God beseeching him to kill 
the heretics. You should not wage war for yourself, but for God” {Helium 
non tuwn, sed Dei esse statuas ). 4 For Ferdinand, the state existed in 
order to serve religion, not vice versa: “In matters of state, which are 
so important for our holy confession, one cannot always take into account 
human considerations; rather, he must hope ... in God . . . and trust only 
in Him.” 5 

Richelieu treated Ferdinand’s faith as a strategic challenge. Though 
privately religious, he viewed his duties as minister in entirely secular 
terms. Salvation might be his personal objective, but to Richelieu, the 
statesman, it was irrelevant. “Man is immortal, his salvation is hereafter,” 
he once said. “The state has no immortality, its salvation is now or 
never.” 6 In other words, states do not receive credit in any world for 
doing what is right; they are only rewarded for being strong enough to 
do what is necessary. 

Richelieu would never have permitted himself to miss the opportunity 
which presented itself to Ferdinand in 1629, the eleventh year of the 
war. The Protestant princes were ready to accept Habsburg political pre- 
eminence provided they remained free to pursue the religion of their 
choice and to retain the Church lands they had seized during the Refor- 
mation. But Ferdinand would not subordinate his religious vocation to 
his political needs. Rejecting what would have been a vast triumph and 
the guarantee of his Empire, determined to stamp out the Protestant 
heresy, he issued the Edict of Restitution, which demanded that Protestant 
sovereigns restore all the lands they had seized from the Church since 
1555. It was a triumph of zeal over expediency, a classic case in which 
faith overrode calculatioas of political self-interest. And it guaranteed a 
battle to the finish. 

Handed this opening, Richelieu was determined to prolong the war 
until Central Europe had been bled white. He put aside religious scruples 
with respect to domestic policy as well. In the Grace of Alais of 1629, he 
granted to French Protestants freedom of worship, the very same freedom 
the Emperor was fighting to deny the German princes. Having protected 
his country against the domestic upheavals rending Central Europe, Ri- 


61 



Diplomacy 


chelieu set out to exploit Ferdinand’s religious fervor in the service of 
French national ends. 

The Habsburg Emperor’s inability to understand his national interests 
— indeed, his refusal to accept the validity of any such concept — gave 
France’s First Minister the opportunity to support and to subsidize the 
Protestant German princes against the Holy Roman Emperor. The role of 
defender of the liberties of the Protestant princes against the centralizing 
goals of the Holy Roman Emperor was an unlikely one for a French 
prelate and his Catholic French King, Louis XIII. That a prince of the 
Church was subsidizing the Protestant King of Sweden, Gustavus 
Adolphus, to make war against the Holy Roman Emperor had revolution- 
ary implications as profound as the upheavals of the French Revolution 
150 years later. 

In an age still dominated by religious zeal and ideological fanaticism, a 
dispassionate foreign policy free of moral imperatives stood out like a 
snow-covered Alp in the desert. Richelieu’s objective was to end what he 
considered the encirclement of France, to exhaust the Habsburgs, and to 
prevent the emergence of a major power on the borders of France — 
especially the German border. His only criterion in making alliances was 
that they served France’s interests, and this he did at first with the Protes- 
tant states and, later, even with the Muslim Ottoman Empire. In order to 
exhaust the belligerents and to prolong the war, Richelieu subsidized the 
enemies of his enemies, bribed, fomented insurrections, and mobilized 
an extraordinary array of dynastic and legal arguments. He succeeded so 
well that the war that had begun in 1618 dragged on decade after decade 
until, finally, history found no more appropriate name for it than its 
duration — the Thirty Years’ War. 

France stood on the sidelines while Germany was devastated, until 
1635, when sheer exhaustion seemed once again to portend an end to 
the hostilities and a compromise peace. Richelieu, however, had no inter- 
est in compromise until the French King had become as powerful as 
the Habsburg Emperor, and preferably stronger. In pursuit of this goal, 
Richelieu convinced his sovereign, in the seventeenth year of the war, of 
the necessity of entering the fray on the side of the Protestant princes — 
and with no better justification than the opportunity to exploit France’s 
growing power: 

If it is a sign of singular prudence to have held down the forces op- 
posed to your state for a period of ten years with the forces of your 
allies, by putting your hand in your pocket and not on your sword, then 
to engage in open warfare when your allies can no longer exist without 


62 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


you is a sign of courage and great wisdom; which shows that, in hus- 
banding the peace of your kingdom, you have behaved like those econ- 
omists who, having taken great care to amass money, also know how to 
spend it 7 

The success of a policy of raison d'etat depends above all on the ability 
to assess power relationships. Universal values are defined by their per- 
ception and are not in need of constant reinterpretation; indeed they are 
inconsistent with it. But determining the limits of power requires a blend 
of experience and insight, and constant adjustment to circumstance. In 
theory, of course, the balance of power should be quite calculable; in 
practice, it has proved extremely difficult to work out realistically. Even 
more complicated is harmonizing one’s calculations with those of other 
states, which is the precondition for the operation of a balance of power. 
Consensus on the nature of the equilibrium is usually established by 
periodic conflict. 

Richelieu had no doubt about his ability to master the challenge, con- 
vinced as he was that it was possible to relate means to ends with nearly 
mathematical precision. “Logic,” he wrote in his Political Testament , “re- 
quires that the thing that is to be supported and the force that is to 
support it should stand in geometrical proportion to each other .” 8 Fate 
had made him a prince of the Church; conviction put him in the intellec- 
tual company of rationalists like Descartes and Spinoza, who thought that 
human action could be scientifically charted; opportunity had enabled 
him to transform the international order to the vast advantage of his 
country. For once, a statesmans estimate of himself was accurate. Riche- 
lieu had a penetrating perception of his goals, but he — and his ideas — 
would not have prevailed had he not been able to gear his tactics to his 
strategy. 

So novel and so cold-blooded a doctrine could not possibly pass with- 
out challenge. However dominant the doctrine of balance of power was 
to become in later years, it was deeply offensive to the universalist tradi- 
tion founded on the primacy of moral law. One of the most telling cri- 
tiques came from the renowned scholar Jansenius, who attacked a policy 
cut loose from all moral moorings: 

Do they believe that a secular, perishable state should outweigh reli- 
gion and the Church? . . . Should not the Most Christian King believe 
that in the guidance and administration of his realm there is nothing 
that obliges him to extend and protect that of Jesus Christ, his Lord? . . . 
Would he dare say to God: Let your power and glory and the religion 


63 



Diplomacy 


which teaches men to adore You be lost and destroyed, provided my 
state is protected and free of risks ? 9 

That, of course, was precisely what Richelieu was saying to his contempo- 
raries and, for all we know, to his God. It was the measure of the revolu- 
tion he had brought about that what his critics thought w 7 as a reductio ad 
absurdum (an argument so immoral and dangerous that it refutes itself) 
was, in fact, a highly accurate summary 7 of Richelieu’s thought. As the 
King’s First Minister, he subsumed both religion and morality to raison 
d'etat, his guiding light. 

Demonstrating how well they had absorbed the cynical methods of the 
master himself, Richelieu’s defenders turned the argument of their critics 
against them. A policy of national self-interest, they argued, represented 
the highest moral law; it was Richelieu’s critics who were in violation of 
ethical principle, not he. 

It fell to Daniel de Priezac, a scholar close to the royal administration, 
to make the formal rebuttal, almost certainly with Richelieu’s ow 7 n impri- 
matur. In classically Machiavellian fashion, Priezac challenged the prem- 
ise that Richelieu was committing mortal sin by pursuing policies w 7 hich 
seemed to favor the spread of heresy. Rather, he argued, it was Richelieu’s 
critics whose souls were at risk. Since France was the most pure and 
devoted of the European Catholic powers, Richelieu, in serving the inter- 
ests of France, was serving as well the interests of the Catholic religion. 

Priezac did not explain how he had reached the conclusion that France 
had been endowed with such a unique religious vocation. However, it 
followed from his premise that strengthening the French state was in the 
interest of the w 7 ell-being of the Catholic Church; hence Richelieu’s policy 
was highly moral. Indeed, the Habsburg encirclement posed so great a 
threat to France’s security that it had to be broken, exonerating the French 
King in whatever methods he chose to pursue that ultimately moral goal. 

He seeks peace by means of war, and if in waging it something happens 
contrary to his desires, it is not a crime of will but of necessity whose 

laws are most harsh and commands most cruel A war is just when 

the intention that causes it to be undertaken is just The will is there- 

fore the principal element that must be considered, not the means. . . . 
[He] who intends to kill the guilty 7 sometimes faultlessly sheds the blood 
of the innocent . 10 

Not to put too fine a point on it, the end justified the means. 

Another of Richelieu’s critics, Mathieu de Morgues, accused the Car- 


64 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


dinal of manipulating religion “as your preceptor Machiavelli showed the 
ancient Romans doing, shaping it . . . explaining it and applying it as far as 
it aids the advancement of your designs.” 11 

De Morgues’s criticism was as telling as that of Jansenius, and as ineffec- 
tive. Richelieu was indeed the manipulator described, and did use reli- 
gion precisely in the manner being alleged. He would no doubt have 
replied that he had merely analyzed the world as it was, much as Machia- 
velli had. Like Machiavelli, he might well have preferred a world of more 
refined moral sensibilities, but he was convinced that history would judge 
his statesmanship by how well he had used the conditions and the factors 
he was given to work with. Indeed, if, in evaluating a statesman, reaching 
the goals he sets for himself is a test, Richelieu must be remembered as 
one of the seminal figures of modern history. For he left behind him a 
world radically different from the one he had found, and set in motion 
the policy France would follow for the next three centuries. 

In this manner, France became the dominant country in Europe and 
vastly expanded its territory. In the century following the Peace of West- 
phalia of 1648, ending the Thirty Years’ War, the doctrine of raison d’etat 
grew into the guiding principle of European diplomacy. Neither the re- 
spect in which statesmen of later centuries would hold Richelieu nor the 
oblivion which was the fate of his opponent, Ferdinand II, would have 
surprised the Cardinal, who was utterly without illusions, even about 
himself. “In matters of state,” wrote Richelieu in his Political Testament, 
“he who has the power often has the right, and he who is weak can only 
with difficulty keep from being wrong in the opinion of the majority of 
the world” — a maxim rarely contradicted in the intervening centuries. 12 

Richelieu’s impact on the history of Central Europe was the reverse of 
the achievements he garnered on France’s behalf. He feared a unified 
Central Europe and prevented it from coming about. In all likelihood, he 
delayed German unification by some two centuries. The initial phase of 
the Thirty Years’ War can be viewed as a Habsburg attempt to act as the 
dynastic unifiers of Germany — much as England had become a nation- 
state under the tutelage of a Norman dynasty and, a few centuries later, 
the French had followed suit under the Capets. Richelieu thwarted the 
Habsburgs and the Holy Roman Empire was divided among more than 
300 sovereigns, each free to conduct an independent foreign policy. Ger- 
many failed to become a nation-state; absorbed in petty dynastic quarrels, 
it turned inward. As a result, Germany developed no national political 
culture and calcified into a provincialism from which it did not emerge 
until late in the nineteenth century when Bismarck unified it. Germany 
was turned into the battleground of most European wars, many of which 


65 



Diplomacy 


were initiated by France, and missed the early wave of European overseas 
colonization. When Germany did finally unify, it had so little experience 
with defining its national interest that it produced many of this century’s 
worst tragedies. 

But the gods often punish man by fulfilling his wishes too completely. 
The Cardinal’s analysis that success of the Counter-Reformation would 
reduce France to an appendage of an increasingly centralized Holy 
Roman Empire was almost certainly correct, especially if one assumed, as 
he must have done, that the age of the nation-state had arrived. But 
whereas the nemesis of Wilsonian idealism is the gap between its profes- 
sions and reality, the nemesis of raison d'etat is overextension — except 
in the hands of a master, and it probably is even then. 

For Richelieu’s concept of raison d'etat had no built-in limitations. 
How far would one go before the interests of the state were deemed 
satisfied? How many wars were needed to achieve security? Wilsonian 
idealism, proclaiming a selfless policy, is possessed of the constant danger 
of neglecting the interests of state; Richelieu’s raison d’etat threatens self- 
destructive tours de force. That is what happened to France after Louis 
XIV assumed the throne. Richelieu had bequeathed to the French kings a 
preponderantly strong state with a weak and divided Germany and a 
decadent Spain on its borders. But Louis XIV gained no peace of mind 
from security; he saw in it an opportunity for conquest. In his overzealous 
pursuit of raison d’etat, Louis XIV alarmed the rest of Europe and brought 
together an anti-French coalition which, in the end, thwarted his design. 

Nevertheless, for 200 years after Richelieu, France was the most influ- 
ential country in Europe, and has remained a major factor in international 
politics to this day. Few statesmen of any country can claim an equal 
achievement. Still, Richelieu’s greatest successes occurred when he was 
the only statesman to jettison the moral and religious restraints of the 
medieval period. Inevitably, Richelieu’s successors inherited the task of 
managing a system in which most states were operating from his prem- 
ises. Thereby, France lost the advantage of having adversaries constrained 
by moral considerations, as Ferdinand had been in the time of Richelieu. 
Once all states played by the same rules, gains became much more diffi- 
cult to achieve. For all the glory raison d’etat brought France, it amounted 
to a treadmill, a never-ending effort to push France’s boundaries outward, 
to become the arbiter of the conflicts among the German states and 
thereby to dominate Central Europe until France was drained by the 
effort and progressively lost the ability to shape Europe according to its 
design. 

Raison d’etat provided a rationale for the behavior of individual states, 


66 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


but it supplied no answer to the challenge of world order. Raison d'etat 
can lead to a quest for primacy or to establishment of equilibrium. But, 
rarely does equilibrium emerge from the conscious design. Usually it 
results from the process of thwarting a particular country’s attempt to 
dominate, as the European balance of power emerged from the effort to 
contain France. 

In the world inaugurated by Richelieu, states were no longer restrained 
by the pretense of a moral code. If the good of the state was the highest 
value, the duty of the ruler was the aggrandizement and promotion of his 
glory. The stronger would seek to dominate, and the weaker would resist 
by forming coalitions to augment their individual strengths. If the coali- 
tion was powerful enough to check the aggressor, a balance of power 
emerged; if not, some country would achieve hegemony. The outcome 
was not foreordained and was therefore tested by frequent wars. At its 
beginning, the outcome could as easily have been empire — French or 
German — as equilibrium. This is why it took over a hundred years to 
establish a European order based explicitly on the balance of power. At 
first, the balance of power was an almost incidental fact of life, not a goal 
of international politics. 

Curiously enough, this is not how it was perceived by the philosophers 
of the period. Products of the Enlightenment, they mirrored the eigh- 
teenth-century faith that out of a clash of competing interests harmony 
and fairness would emerge. The concept of the balance of power was 
simply an extension of conventional wisdom. Its primary goal was to 
prevent domination by one state and to preserve the international order; 
it was not designed to prevent conflicts, but to limit them. To the hard- 
headed statesmen of the eighteenth century, the elimination of conflict 
(or of ambition or of greed) was utopian; the solution was to harness or 
counterpoise the inherent flaws of human nature to produce the best 
possible long-term outcome. 

The philosophers of the Enlightenment viewed the international sys- 
tem as part of a universe operating like a great clockwork which, never 
standing still, inexorably advanced toward a better world. In 1751, Vol- 
taire described a “Christian Europe” as “a sort of great republic divided 
into several states, some monarchical, the others mixed . . . but all in har- 
mony with each other ... all possessing the same principles of public and 
political law, unknown in other parts of the world.” These states were 
“above all . . . at one in the wise policy of maintaining among themselves 
as far as possible an equal balance of power.” 13 

Montesquieu took up the same theme. For him, the balance of power 
distilled unity out of diversity: 


67 



Diplomacy 


The state of things in Europe is that all the states depend on each other. 

. . . Europe is a single state composed of several provinces. 14 

As these lines were being written, the eighteenth century had already 
endured two wars over the Spanish succession, a war over the Polish 
succession, and a series of wars over the Austrian succession. 

In the same spirit, the philosopher of history Emmerich de Vattel could 
write in 1758, the second year of the Seven Years’ War, that: 

The continual negotiations that take place, make modern Europe a 
sort of republic, whose members — each independent, but all bound 
together by a common interest — unite for the maintenance of order 
and the preservation of liberty. This is what has given rise to the well- 
known principle of the balance of power, by which is meant an arrange- 
ment of affairs so that no state shall be in a position to have absolute 
mastery and dominate over the others. 15 

The philosophers were confusing the result with the intent. Throughout 
the eighteenth century, the princes of Europe fought innumerable wars 
without there being a shred of evidence that the conscious goal was to 
implement any general notion of international order. At the precise mo- 
ment when international relations came to be based on power, so many 
new factors emerged that calculations became increasingly unmanage- 
able. 

The various dynasties henceforth concentrated on enhancing their se- 
curity by territorial expansion. In the process, the relative power posi- 
tions of several of them altered drastically. Spain and Sweden were 
sinking into second-rank status. Poland began its slide toward extinction. 
Russia (which had been entirely absent from the Peace of Westphalia) 
and Prussia (which played an insignificant role) were emerging as major 
powers. The balance of power is difficult enough to analyze when its 
components are relatively fixed. The task of assessing it and reconciling 
the assessments of the various powers becomes hopelessly intricate when 
the relative mights of the powers are in constant flux. 

The vacuum created in Central Europe by the Thirty Years’ War 
tempted the surrounding countries to encroach upon it. France kept 
pressing from the west. Russia was on the march in the east. Prussia 
expanded in the center of the Continent. None of the key Continental 
countries felt any special obligation to the balance of power so lauded by 
the philosophers. Russia thought of itself as too distant. Prussia, as the 
smallest of the Great Powers, was still too weak to affect the general 


68 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


equilibrium. Every king consoled himself with the thought that strength- 
ening his own rule was the greatest possible contribution to the general 
peace, and left it to the ubiquitous invisible hand to justify his exertions 
without limiting his ambitions. 

The nature of raison d’etat as an essentially risk-benefit calculation was 
shown by the way Frederick the Great justified his seizure of Silesia from 
Austria, despite Prussia’s heretofore amicable relations with that state and 
despite its being bound by treaty to respect Austria’s territorial integrity: 

The superiority of our troops, the promptitude with which we can set 
them in motion, in a word, the clear advantage we have over our 
neighbors, gives us in this unexpected emergency an infinite superior- 
ity over all other powers of Europe. . . . England and France are foes. If 
France should meddle in the affairs of the empire, England could not 
allow it, so I can always make a good alliance with one or the other. 
England could not be jealous of my getting Silesia, which would do her 
no harm, and she needs allies. Holland will not care, all the more since 
the loans of the Amsterdam business world secured on Silesia will be 
guaranteed. If we cannot arrange with England and Holland, we can 
certainly make a deal with France, who cannot frustrate our designs 
and will welcome the abasement of the imperial house. Russia alone 
might give us trouble. If the empress lives ... we can bribe the leading 
counsellors. If she dies, the Russians will be so occupied that they will 
have no time for foreign affairs — 16 

Frederick the Great treated international affairs as if it were a game of 
chess. He wanted to seize Silesia in order to expand the power of Prussia. 
The only obstacle he would recognize to his designs was resistance from 
superior powers, not moral scruples. His was a risk/reward analysis: if he 
conquered Silesia, would other states retaliate or seek compensation? 

Frederick resolved the calculation in his favor. His conquest of Silesia 
made Prussia a bona fide Great Power, but it also set off a series of wars 
as other countries tried to adjust to this new player. The first was the War 
of the Austrian Succession, from 1740 to 1748. In it, Prussia was joined by 
France, Spain, Bavaria, and Saxony — which in 1743 switched sides — 
while Great Britain supported Austria. In the second war — the Seven 
Years’ War, from 1756 to 1763 — the roles were reversed. Austria was now 
joined by Russia, France, Saxony, and Sweden, while Great Britain and 
Hanover supported Prussia. The change of sides was the result of pure 
calculations of immediate benefit and specific compensations, not of any 
overriding principle of international order. 

Yet a sort of equilibrium gradually emerged out of this seeming anar- 


69 



Diplomacy 


chy and rapine in which each state sought single-mindedly to augment its 
own power. It was due not to self-restraint but to the fact that no state, 
not even France, was strong enough to impose its will on all the others 
and thus form an empire. When any state threatened to become domi- 
nant, its neighbors formed a coalition — not in pursuit of a theory of 
international relations but out of pure self-interest to block the ambitions 
of the most powerful. 

These constant wars did not lead to the devastations of the religious 
wars for two reasons. Paradoxically, the absolute rulers of the eighteenth 
century were in a less strong position to mobilize resources for war than 
was the case when religion or ideology or popular government could stir 
the emotions. They were restrained by tradition and perhaps by their 
own insecurity from imposing income taxes and many other modern 
exactions, limiting the amount of national wealth potentially devoted to 
war, and weapons technology was rudimentary. 

Above all, the equilibrium on the Continent was reinforced and in fact 
managed by the appearance of a state whose foreign policy was explicitly 
dedicated to maintaining the balance. England’s policy was based on 
throwing its weight as the occasion required to the weaker and more 
threatened side to redress the equilibrium. The original engineer of this 
policy was King William III of England, a stern and worldly Dutchman by 
birth. In his native Holland he had suffered from the ambitions of the 
French Sun King and, when he became King of England, set about forging 
coalitions to thwart Louis XIV at every turn. England was the one Euro- 
pean country whose raison d'etat did not require it to expand in Europe. 
Perceiving its national interest to be in the preservation of the European 
balance, it was the one country which sought no more for itself on the 
Continent than preventing the domination of Europe by a single power. 
In pursuit of that objective, it made itself available to any combination of 
nations opposing such an enterprise. 

A balance of power gradually emerged by means of shifting coalitions 
under British leadership against French attempts to dominate Europe. 
This dynamic lay at the core of almost every war fought in the eighteenth 
century and every British-led coalition against French hegemony fought 
in the name of the selfsame European liberties which Richelieu had first 
invoked in Germany against the Habsburgs. The balance of power held 
because the nations resisting French domination were too strong to be 
overcome, and because a century and a half of expansionism progres- 
sively drained France of its wealth. 

Great Britain’s role as the balancer reflected a geopolitical fact of life. 
The survival of a relatively small island off the coast of Europe would 
have been jeopardized had all the resources of the Continent been mobi- 


70 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


lized under a single ruler. For, in such a case, England (as it was before 
its union with Scotland in 1707) possessed much smaller resources and 
population and would have sooner or later been at the mercy of a Conti- 
nental empire. 

England’s Glorious Revolution of 1688 forced it into an immediate 
confrontation with Louis XIV of France. The Glorious Revolution had 
deposed the Catholic King, James II. Searching for a Protestant replace- 
ment on the Continent, England chose William of Orange, ruler (Stadt- 
halter) of the Netherlands, who had a tenuous claim to the British throne 
through his marriage to Mary, the sister of the deposed King. With 
William, England imported an ongoing war with Louis XIV over what 
later became Belgium, a land full of important fortresses and harbors 
within perilously easy reach of the British coast (though this concern de- 
veloped only over time). William knew that if Louis XIV succeeded in 
occupying these fortresses, the Netherlands would lose their indepen- 
dence, the prospects for French domination in Europe would multiply, 
and England would be directly threatened. William’s resolve to send En- 
glish troops to fight for present-day Belgium against France was a precur- 
sor of the British decision to fight for Belgium in 1914 when the Germans 
invaded it. 

Henceforth, William would spearhead the fight against Louis XIV. Short, 
hunchbacked, and asthmatic, William did not at first glance appear to be 
the man destined to humble the Sun King. But the Prince of Orange 
possessed an iron will combined with extraordinary mental agility. He 
convinced himself — almost certainly correctly — that if Louis XIV, already 
the most powerful monarch in Europe, were permitted to conquer the 
Spanish Netherlands (present-day Belgium), England would be at risk. A 
coalition capable of reining in the French King had to be forged, not as a 
matter of the abstract theory of balance of power but for the sake of the 
independence of both the Netherlands and of England. William recog- 
nized that Louis XIV’s designs on Spain and its possessions, if realized, 
would turn France into a superpower that no combination of states would 
be able to challenge. To forestall that danger, he sought out partners and 
soon found them. Sweden, Spain, Savoy, the Austrian Emperor, Saxony, 
the Dutch Republic, and England formed the Grand Alliance — the great- 
est coalition of forces aligned against a single power that modern Europe 
had ever seen. For about a quarter of a century (1688-1713), Louis waged 
almost constant wars against this coalition. In the end, however, France’s 
pursuit of raison d'etat was reined in by the self-interest of Europe’s 
other states. France would remain the strongest state in Europe, but it 
would not become dominant. It was a textbook case of the functioning of 
the balance of power. 


71 



Diplomacy 


William’s hostility to Louis XIV was neither personal nor based on any 
anti-French sentiment; it reflected his cold assessment of the Sun King’s 
power and boundless ambition. William once confided to an aide that, 
had he lived in the 1550s, when the Habsburgs were threatening to 
become dominant, he would have been “as much a Frenchman as he was 
now a Spaniard” 17 — a precursor of Winston Churchill’s reply in the 1930s 
to the charge that he was anti-German: “If the circumstances were re- 
versed, we could equally be pro-German and anti-French.” 18 

William was perfectly willing to negotiate with Louis XIV when he felt 
the balance of power could best be served by doing so. For William, the 
simple calculation was that England would try to maintain a rough bal- 
ance between the Habsburgs and the Bourbons, so that whoever was 
weaker would maintain, with British help, the equilibrium of Europe. 
Ever since Richelieu, the weaker side had been Austria, and therefore 
Great Britain aligned itself with the Habsburgs against French expan- 
sionism. 

The idea of acting as the balancer did not commend itself to the British 
public when it first made its appearance. In the late seventeenth century, 
British public opinion was isolationist, much like that of America two 
centuries later. The prevailing argument had it that there would be time 
enough to resist a threat, when and if the threat presented itself. There 
was no need to fight conjectural dangers based on what some country 
might do later on. 

William played the equivalent of Theodore Roosevelt’s later role in 
America, warning his essentially isolationist people that their safety de- 
pended on participation in a balance of power overseas. And his coun- 
trymen accepted his views far more quickly than Americans embraced 
Roosevelt’s. Some twenty years after William’s death, The Craftsman, a 
newspaper typically representative of the opposition, noted that the bal- 
ance of power was one of “the original, everlasting principles of British 
politics,” and that peace on the Continent was “so essential a circum- 
stance to the prosperity of a trading island, that ... it ought to be the 
constant endeavor of a British ministry to preserve it themselves, and to 
restore it, when broken or disturbed by others.” 19 

Agreeing on the importance of the balance of power did not, however, 
still British disputes about the best strategy to implement the policy. 
There were two schools of thought, representing the two major political 
parties in Parliament, and substantially paralleling a similar disagreement 
in the United States after the two world wars. The Whigs argued that 
Great Britain should engage itself only when the balance was actually 
threatened, and then only long enough to remove the threat. By contrast, 


72 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


the Tories believed that Great Britain’s main duty was to shape and not 
simply to protect the balance of power. The Whigs were of the view that 
there would be plenty of time to resist an assault on the Low Countries 
after it had actually occurred; the Tories reasoned that a policy of wait- 
and-see might allow an aggressor to weaken the balance irreparably. 
Therefore, if Great Britain wished to avoid fighting in Dover, it had to 
resist aggression along the Rhine or wherever else in Europe the balance 
of power seemed to be threatened. The Whigs considered alliances as 
temporary expedients, to be terminated once victory had rendered the 
common purpose moot, whereas the Tories urged British participation 
in permanent cooperative arrangements to enable Great Britain to help 
shape events and to preserve the peace. 

Lord Carteret, Tory Foreign Secretary from 1742 to 1744, made an 
eloquent case for a permanent engagement in Europe. He denounced 
the Whigs’ inclination “to disregard all the troubles and commotions of 
the continent, not to leave our own island in search of enemies, but to 
attend our commerce and our pleasures, and, instead of courting danger 
in foreign countries, to sleep in security, till we are awakened by an alarm 
upon our coasts.” But Great Britain, he said, needed to face the reality of 
its permanent interest in bolstering the Habsburgs as a counterweight to 
France, “for if the French monarch once saw himself freed from a rival 
on that continent, he would sit secure in possession of his conquests, he 
might then reduce his garrisons, abandon his fortresses, and discharge 
his troops; but that treasure which now fills the plains with soldiers, 
would soon be employed in designs more dangerous to our country — 
We must consequently, my lords, . . . support the House of Austria which 
is the only power that can be placed in the balance against the princes of 
the family of Bourbon.” 20 

The difference between the foreign-policy strategies of the Whigs and 
the Tories was practical, not philosophical; tactical, not strategic; and it 
reflected each party’s assessment of Great Britain’s vulnerability. The 
Whigs’ policy of wait-and-see reflected the conviction that Great Britain’s 
margin of safety was wide indeed. The Tories found Great Britain’s posi- 
tion more precarious. Almost precisely the same distinction would sepa- 
rate American isolationists and American globalists in the twentieth 
century. Neither Great Britain in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
nor America in the twentieth found it easy to persuade the citizenry that 
its safety required permanent commitment rather than isolation. 

Periodically, in both countries, a leader would emerge who put before 
his people the need for permanent engagement. Wilson produced the 
League of Nations; Carteret flirted with permanent engagements on the 


73 



Diplomacy 


Continent; Castlereagh, Foreign Secretary from 1812 to 1821, advocated a 
system of European congresses; and Gladstone, Prime Minister in the late 
nineteenth century, proposed the first version of collective security. In 
the end, their appeals failed, because, until after the end of the Second 
World War, neither the English nor the American people could be con- 
vinced that they faced a mortal challenge until it was clearly upon them. 

In this manner, Great Britain became the balancer of the European 
equilibrium, first almost by default, later by conscious strategy. Without 
Great Britain’s tenacious commitment to that role, France would almost 
surely have achieved hegemony over Europe in the eighteenth or nine- 
teenth century, and Germany would have done the same in the modern 
period. In that sense, Churchill could rightly claim two centuries later 
that Great Britain had “preserved the liberties of Europe.” 21 

Early in the nineteenth century, Great Britain turned its ad hoc defense 
of the balance of power into a conscious design. Until then, it had gone 
about its policy pragmatically, consistent with the genius of the British 
people, resisting any country threatening the equilibrium — which, in the 
eighteenth century, was invariably France. Wars ended with compromise, 
usually marginally enhancing the position of France but depriving it of 
the hegemony which was its real goal. 

Inevitably, France provided the occasion for the first detailed statement 
of what Great Britain understood by the balance of power. Having sought 
pre-eminence for a century and a half in the name of raison d’etat, France 
after the Revolution had returned to earlier concepts of universality. No 
longer did France invoke raison d'etat for its expansionism, even less the 
glory of its fallen kings. After the Revolution, France made war on the rest 
of Europe to preserve its revolution and to spread republican ideals 
throughout Europe. Once again, a preponderant France was threatening 
to dominate Europe. Conscript armies and ideological fervor propelled 
French armies across Europe on behalf of universal principles of liberty, 
equality, and fraternity. Under Napoleon, they came within a hairsbreadth 
of establishing a European commonwealth centered on France. By 1807, 
French armies had set up satellite kingdoms along the Rhine in Italy and 
Spain, reduced Prussia to a second-rank power, and gravely weakened 
Austria. Only Russia stood between Napoleon and France’s domination of 
Europe. 

Yet Russia already inspired the ambivalent reaction — part hope and 
part fear — that was to be its lot until the present day. At the beginning of 
the eighteenth century, the Russian frontier had been on the Dnieper; a 
century later, it reached the Vistula, 500 miles farther west. At the begin- 
ning of the eighteenth century, Russia had been fighting for its existence 


74 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


against Sweden at Poltava, deep in present-day Ukraine. By the middle of 
the century, it was participating in the Seven Years’ War, and its troops 
were at the outskirts of Berlin. By the end of the century, it would be the 
principal agent in the partition of Poland. 

Russia’s raw physical power was made all the more ominous by the 
merciless autocracy of its domestic institutions. Its absolutism was not 
mitigated by custom or by an assertive and independent aristocracy, as 
was the case with the monarchs ruling by divine right in Western Europe. 
In Russia, everything depended on the whim of the tsar. It was entirely 
possible for Russian foreign policy to veer from liberalism to conserva- 
tism depending on the mood of the incumbent tsar — as indeed it did 
under the reigning Tsar Alexander I. At home, however, no liberal experi- 
ment was ever attempted. 

In 1804, the mercurial Alexander I, Tsar of all the Russias, approached 
British Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger, Napoleon’s most implaca- 
ble enemy, with a proposition. Heavily influenced by the philosophers of 
the Enlightenment, Alexander I imagined himself as the moral conscience 
of Europe and was in the last phase of his temporary infatuation with 
liberal institutions. In that frame of mind, he proposed to Pitt a vague 
scheme for universal peace, calling for all nations to reform their constitu- 
tions with a view to ending feudalism and adopting constitutional rule. 
The reformed states would thereupon abjure force and submit their dis- 
putes with one another to arbitration. The Russian autocrat thus became 
the unlikely precursor of the Wilsonian idea that liberal institutions were 
the prerequisite to peace, though he never went so far as to seek to 
translate these principles into practice among his own people. And within 
a few years, he would move to the opposite conservative extreme of the 
political spectrum. 

Pitt now found himself in much the same position vis-a-vis Alexander 
as Churchill would find himself vis-a-vis Stalin nearly 150 years later. He 
desperately needed Russian support against Napoleon, for it was impossi- 
ble to imagine how Napoleon could be defeated in any other way. On 
the other hand, Pitt had no more interest than Churchill would later have 
in replacing one dominant country with another, or in endorsing Russia 
as the arbiter of Europe. Above all, British domestic inhibitions did not 
allow any prime minister to commit his country to basing peace on the 
political and social reform of Europe. No British war had ever been 
fought for such a cause, because the British people did not feel threat- 
ened by social and political upheavals on the Continent, only by changes 
in the balance of power. 

Pitt’s reply to Alexander I captured all of these elements. Ignoring the 


75 



Diplomacy 


Russian’s call for the political reform of Europe, he outlined the equilib- 
rium that would need to be constructed if peace was to be preserved. A 
general European settlement was now being envisaged for the first time 
since the Peace of Westphalia a century and a half before. And, for the 
first time ever, a settlement would be explicitly based on the principles 
of the balance of power. 

Pitt saw the principal cause for instability in the weakness of Central 
Europe, which had repeatedly tempted French incursion and attempts at 
predominance. (He was too polite and too eager for Russian help to point 
out that a Central Europe strong enough to withstand French pressures 
would be equally in a position to thwart Russian expansionist tempta- 
tions.) A European settlement needed to begin by depriving France of all 
her postrevolutionary conquests and, in the process, restore the indepen- 
dence of the Low Countries, thereby neatly making the chief British con- 
cern a principle of settlement. 22 

Reducing French preponderance would be of no use, however, if the 
300-odd smaller German states continued to tempt French pressure and 
intervention. To thwart such ambitions, Pitt thought it necessary to create 
“great masses” in the center of Europe by consolidating the German 
principalities into larger groupings. Some of the states which had joined 
France or collapsed ignominiously would be annexed by Prussia or Aus- 
tria. Others would be formed into larger units. 

Pitt avoided any reference to a European government. Instead, he pro- 
posed that Great Britain, Prussia, Austria, and Russia guarantee the new 
territorial arrangement in Europe by means of a permanent alliance di- 
rected against French aggression — just as Franklin D. Roosevelt later tried 
to base the post-World War II international order on an alliance against 
Germany and Japan. Neither Great Britain in the Napoleonic period nor 
America in World War II could imagine that the biggest threat to peace in 
the future might prove to be the current ally rather than the yet-to-be- 
defeated enemy. It was a measure of the fear of Napoleon that a British 
prime minister should have been willing to agree to what heretofore had 
been so adamantly rejected by his country— a permanent engagement on 
the Continent — and that Great Britain should impair its tactical flexibility 
by basing its policy on the assumption of a permanent enemy. 

The emergence of the European balance of power in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries parallels certain aspects of the post-Cold War 
world. Then, as now, a collapsing world order spawned a multitude of 
states pursuing their national interests, unrestrained by any overriding 
principles. Then, as now, the states making up the international order 
were groping for some definition of their international role. Then the 


76 



From Universality to Equilibrium 


various states decided to rely entirely on asserting their national interest, 
putting their trust in the so-called unseen hand. The issue is whether the 
post-Cold War world can find some principle to restrain the assertion of 
power and self-interest. Of course, in the end a balance of power always 
comes about de facto when several states interact. The question is 
whether the maintenance of the international system can turn into a 
conscious design, or whether it will grow out of a series of tests of 
strength. 

By the time the Napoleonic Wars were ending, Europe was ready to 
design — for the only time in its history — an international order based on 
the principles of the balance of power. It had been learned in the crucible 
of the wars of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries that the 
balance of power could not be left to the residue of the collision of the 
European states. Pitt’s plan had outlined a territorial settlement to rectify 
the weaknesses of the eighteenth -century world order. But Pitt’s Conti- 
nental allies had learned an additional lesson. 

Power is too difficult to assess, and the willingness to vindicate it too 
various, to permit treating it as a reliable guide to international order. 
Equilibrium works best if it is buttressed by an agreement on common 
values. The balance of power inhibits the capacity to overthrow the inter- 
national order; agreement on shared values inhibits the desire to over- 
throw the international order. Power without legitimacy tempts tests of 
strength; legitimacy without power tempts empty posturing. 

Combining both elements was the challenge and the success of the 
Congress of Vienna, which established a century of international order 
uninterrupted by a general war. 


77 




CHAPTER FOUR 

The Concert of Europe: 
Great Britain, 

Austria, and Russia 

WhUe Napoleon was enduring his first exile, at Elba, the victors of the 
Napoleonic Wars assembled at Vienna in September 1814 to plan the 
postwar world. The Congress of Vienna continued to meet all during 
Napoleons escape from Elba and his final defeat at Waterloo. In the 
meantime, the need to rebuild the international order had become even 
more urgent. 

Prince von Metternich served as Austria’s negotiator, though, with the 
Congress meeting in Vienna, the Austrian Emperor was never far from 
the scene. The King of Prussia sent Prince von Hardenberg, and the newly 
restored Louis XVIII of France relied on Talleyrand, who thereby 


78 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


maintained his record of having served every French ruler since before 
the revolution. Tsar Alexander I, refusing to yield the Russian pride of 
place to anyone, came to speak for himself. The English Foreign Secre- 
tary, Lord Castlereagh, negotiated on Great Britain’s behalf. 

These five men achieved what they had set out to do. After the Congress 
of Vienna, Europe experienced the longest period of peace it had ever 
known. No war at all took place among the Great Powers for forty years, 
and after the Crimean War of 1854, no general war for another sixty. The 
Vienna settlement corresponded to the Pitt Plan so literally that, when 
Castlereagh submitted it to Parliament, he attached a draft of the original 
British design to show how closely it had been followed. 

Paradoxically, this international order, which was created more explic- 
itly in the name of the balance of power than any other before or since, 
relied the least on power to maintain itself. This unique state of affairs 
occurred partly because the equilibrium was designed so well that it 
could only be overthrown by an effort of a magnitude too difficult to 
mount. But the most important reason was that the Continental countries 
were knit together by a sense of shared values. There was not only a 
physical equilibrium, but a moral one. Power and justice were in substan- 
tial harmony. The balance of power reduces the opportunities for using 
force; a shared sense of justice reduces the desire to use force. An interna- 
tional order which is not considered just will be challenged sooner or 
later. But how a people perceives the fairness of a particular world order 
is determined as much by its domestic institutions as by judgments on 
tactical foreign-policy issues. For that reason, compatibility between do- 
mestic institutions is a reinforcement for peace. Ironic as it may seem, 
Metternich presaged Wilson, in the sense that he believed that a shared 
concept of justice was a prerequisite for international order, however 
diametrically opposed his idea of justice was to what Wilson sought to 
institutionalize in the twentieth century. 

Creating the general balance of power proved relatively simple. The 
statesmen followed the Pitt Plan like an architect’s drawing. Since the idea 
of national self-determination had not yet been invented, they were not 
in the least concerned with carving states of ethnic homogeneity out of 
the territory reconquered from Napoleon. Austria was strengthened in 
Italy, and Prussia in Germany. The Dutch Republic acquired the Austrian 
Netherlands (mostly present-day Belgium). France had to give up all 
conquests and return to the “ancient frontiers” it had possessed before 
the Revolution. Russia received the heartland of Poland. (In conformity 
with its policy of not making acquisitions on the Continent, Great Britain 
confined its territorial gains to the Cape of Good Hope at the southern 
tip of Africa.) 


79 



Diplomacy 


In Great Britain’s concept of world order, the test of the balance of 
power was how well the various nations could perform the roles assigned 
to them in the overall design — much as the United States came to regard 
its alliances in the period after the Second World War. In implementing 
this approach, Great Britain faced with respect to the Continental coun- 
tries the same difference in perspective that the United States encoun- 
tered during the Cold War. For nations simply do not define their 
purpose as cogs in a security system. Security makes their existence possi- 
ble; it is never their sole or even principal purpose. 

Austria and Prussia no more thought of themselves as “great masses” 
than France would later see the purpose of NATO in terms of a division 
of labor. The overall balance of power meant little to Austria and Prussia 
if it did not at the same time do justice to their own special and complex 
relationship, or take account of their countries’ historic roles. 

After the Habsburgs’ failure to achieve hegemony in Central Europe in 
the Thirty Years’ War, Austria had abandoned its attempt to dominate all 
of Germany. In 1806, the vestigial Holy Roman Empire was abolished. But 
Austria still saw itself as first among equals and was determined to keep 
every other German state, especially Prussia, from assuming Austria’s 
historic leadership role. 

And Austria had every reason to be watchful. Ever since Frederick the 
Great had seized Silesia, Austria’s claim to leadership in Germany had 
been challenged by Prussia. A ruthless diplomacy, devotion to the military 
arts, and a highly developed sense of discipline propelled Prussia in the 
course of a century from a secondary principality on the barren North 
German plain to a kingdom which, though still the smallest of the Great 
Powers, was militarily among the most formidable. Its oddly shaped fron- 
tiers stretched across Northern Germany from the partly Polish east to 
the somewhat Latinized Rhineland (which was separated from Prussia’s 
original territory by the Kingdom of Hanover), providing the Prussian 
state with an overwhelming sense of national mission — if for no higher 
purpose than to defend its fragmented territories. 

Both the relationship between these two largest German states and 
their relationship to the other German states were central to European 
stability. Indeed, at least since the Thirty Years’ War, Germany’s internal 
arrangements had presented Europe with the same dilemma: whenever 
Germany was weak and divided, it tempted its neighbors, especially 
France, into expansionism. At the same time, the prospect of German 
unity terrified surrounding states, and has continued to do so even in our 
own time. Richelieu’s fear that a united Germany might dominate Europe 
and overwhelm France had been anticipated by a British observer who 


80 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


wrote in 1609: “ as for Germany, which if it were entirely subject to 
one Monarchy, would be terrible to all the rest.” 1 Historically, Germany 
has been either too weak or too strong for the peace of Europe. 

The architects at the Congress of Vienna recognized that, if Central 
Europe were to have peace and stability, they would have to undo Riche- 
lieu’s work of the 1600s. Richelieu had fostered a weak, fragmented Cen- 
tral Europe, providing France with a standing temptation to encroach and 
to turn it into a virtual playground for the French army. Thus, the states- 
men at Vienna set about consolidating, but not unifying, Germany. Austria 
and Prussia were the leading German states, after which came a number 
of medium-sized states — Bavaria, Wurttemberg, and Saxony among them 
— which had been enlarged and strengthened. The 300-odd pre-Napole- 
onic states were combined into some thirty and bound together in a new 
entity called the German Confederation. Providing for common defense 
against outside aggression, the German Confederation proved to be an 
ingenious creation. It was too strong to be attacked by France, but too 
weak and decentralized to threaten its neighbors. The Confederation 
balanced Prussia’s superior military strength against Austria’s superior 
prestige and legitimacy. The purpose of the Confederation was to forestall 
German unity on a national basis, to preserve the thrones of the various 
German princes and monarchs, and to forestall French aggression. It 
succeeded on all these counts. 

In dealing with the defeated enemy, the victors designing a peace 
settlement must navigate the transition from the intransigence vital to 
victory to the conciliation needed to achieve a lasting peace. A punitive 
peace mortgages the international order because it saddles the victors, 
drained by their wartime exertions, with the task of holding down a 
country determined to undermine the settlement. Any country with a 
grievance is assured of finding nearly automatic support from the disaf- 
fected defeated party. This would be the bane of the Treaty of Versailles. 

The victors at the Congress of Vienna, like the victors in the Second 
World War, avoided making this mistake. It was no easy matter to be 
generous toward France, which had been trying to dominate Europe for 
a century and a half and whose armies had camped among its neighbors 
for a quarter of a century. Nevertheless, the statesmen at Vienna con- 
cluded that Europe would be safer if France were relatively satisfied 
rather than resentful and disaffected. France was deprived of its con- 
quests, but granted its “ancient” — that is, prerevolutionary — frontiers, 
even though this represented a considerably larger territory than the one 
Richelieu had ruled. Castlereagh, the Foreign Minister of Napoleon’s most 
implacable foe, made the case that: 


81 



Diplomacy 


The continued excesses of France may, no doubt, yet drive Europe . . . 
to a measure of dismemberment . . . [but] let the Allies then take this 
further chance of securing that repose which all the Powers of Europe 
so much require, with the assurance that if disappointed . . . they will 
again take up arms, not only with commanding positions in their hands, 
but with that moral force which can alone keep such a confederacy 
together — 2 

By 1818, France was admitted to the Congress system at periodic Euro- 
pean congresses, which for half a century came close to constituting the 
government of Europe. 

Convinced that the various nations understood their self-interest suffi- 
ciently to defend it if challenged, Great Britain would probably have been 
content to leave matters there. The British believed no formal guarantee 
was either required or could add much to commonsense analysis. The 
countries of Central Europe, however, victims of wars for a century and a 
half, insisted on tangible assurances. 

Austria in particular faced dangers that were inconceivable to Great 
Britain. A vestige of feudal times, Austria was a polyglot empire, grouping 
together the multiple nationalities of the Danube basin around its historic 
positions in Germany and Northern Italy. Aware of the increasingly disso- 
nant currents of liberalism and nationalism which threatened its exis- 
tence, Austria sought to spin a web of moral restraint to forestall tests of 
strength. Metternich’s consummate skill was in inducing the key countries 
to submit their disagreements to a sense of shared values. Talleyrand 
expressed the importance of having some principle of restraint this way: 

If . . . the minimum of resisting power . . . were equal to the maximum 
of aggressive power . . . there would be a real equilibrium. But . . . the 
actual situation admits solely of an equilibrium which is artificial and 
precarious and which can only last so long as certain large States are 
animated by a spirit of moderation and justice. 3 


After the Congress of Vienna, the relationship between the balance of 
power and a shared sense of legitimacy was expressed in two documents: 
the Quadruple Alliance, consisting of Great Britain, Prussia, Austria, and 
Russia; and the Holy Alliance, which was limited to the three so-called 
Eastern Courts — Prussia, Austria, and Russia. In the early nineteenth cen- 
tury, France was regarded with the same fear as Germany has been in the 
twentieth century — as a chronically aggressive, inherently destabilizing 
power. Therefore, the statesmen at Vienna forged the Quadruple Alliance, 


82 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


designed to nip any aggressive French tendencies in the bud with over- 
whelming force. Had the victors convening at Versailles made a similar 
alliance in 1918, the world might never have suffered a Second World 
War. 

The Holy Alliance was altogether different; Europe had not seen such 
a document since Ferdinand II had left the throne of the Holy Roman 
Empire nearly two centuries earlier. It was proposed by the Russian Tsar, 
who could not bring himself to abandon his self-appointed mission to 
revamp the international system and reform its participants. In 1804, 
Pitt had deflated his proposed crusade for liberal institutions; by 1815, 
Alexander was imbued with too strong a sense of victory to be thus 
denied — regardless that his current crusade was the exact opposite of 
what he had advocated eleven years earlier. Now Alexander was in thrall 
to religion and to conservative values and proposed nothing less than a 
complete reform of the international system based on the proposition 
that “the course formerly adopted by the Powers in their mutual relations 
had to be fundamentally changed and that it was urgent to replace it 
with an order of things based on the exalted truths of the eternal religion 
of our Saviour.” 4 

The Austrian Emperor joked that he was at a loss as to whether to 
discuss these ideas in the Council of Ministers or in the confessional. But 
he also knew that he could neither join the Tsar’s crusade nor, in re- 
buffing it, give Alexander a pretext to go it alone, leaving Austria to face 
the liberal and national currents of the period without allies. This is why 
Metternich transformed the Tsar’s draft into what came to be known as 
the Holy Alliance, which interpreted the religious imperative as an obliga- 
tion by the signatories to preserve the domestic status quo in Europe. For 
the first time in modern history, the European Powers had given them- 
selves a common mission. 

No British statesman could possibly have joined any enterprise estab- 
lishing a general right — indeed, an obligation — to intervene in the do- 
mestic affairs of other states. Castlereagh called the Holy Alliance a “piece 
of sublime mysticism and nonsense.” 5 Metternich, however, saw in it an 
opportunity to commit the Tsar to sustain legitimate rule, and above all 
to keep him from experimenting with his missionary impulses unilater- 
ally and without restraint. The Holy Alliance brought the conservative 
monarchs together in combatting revolution, but it also obliged them to 
act only in concert, in effect giving Austria a theoretical veto over the 
adventures of its smothering Russian ally. The so-called Concert of Eu- 
rope implied that nations which were competitive on one level would 
settle matters affecting overall stability by consensus. 


83 



Diplomacy 


The Holy Alliance was the most original aspect of the Vienna settle- 
ment. Its exalted name has diverted attention from its operational signifi- 
cance, which was to introduce an element of moral restraint into the 
relationship of the Great Powers. The vested interest which they devel- 
oped in the survival of their domestic institutions caused the Continental 
countries to avoid conflicts which they would have pursued as a matter 
of course in the previous century. 

It would be too simple to argue, however, that compatible domestic 
institutions guarantee a peaceful balance of power by themselves. In the 
eighteenth century, all the rulers of the Continental countries governed 
by divine right — their domestic institutions were eminently compatible. 
Yet these same rulers governed with a feeling of permanence and con- 
ducted endless wars with each other precisely because they considered 
their domestic institutions unassailable. 

Woodrow Wilson was not the first to believe that the nature of domestic 
institutions determined a state’s behavior internationally. Metternich be- 
lieved that too but on the basis of an entirely different set of premises. 
Whereas Wilson believed the democracies to be peace-loving and reason- 
able by their very nature, Metternich considered them dangerous and 
unpredictable. Having witnessed the suffering that a republican France 
had inflicted on Europe, Metternich identified peace with legitimate rule. 
He expected the crowned heads of ancient dynasties, if not to preserve 
the peace, then at least to preserve the basic structure of international 
relations. In this manner, legitimacy became the cement by which the 
international order was held together. 

The difference between the Wilsonian and the Metternich approaches 
to domestic justice and international order is fundamental to understand- 
ing the contrasting views of America and Europe. Wilson crusaded for 
principles which he perceived as revolutionary and new. Metternich 
sought to institutionalize values he considered ancient. Wilson, presiding 
over a country consciously created to set man free, was persuaded that 
democratic values could be legislated and then embodied in entirely 
new worldwide institutions. Metternich, representing an ancient country 
whose institutions had developed gradually, almost imperceptibly, did 
not believe that rights could be created by legislation. “Rights,” according 
to Metternich, simply existed in the nature of things. Whether they were 
affirmed by laws or by constitutions was an essentially technical question 
which had nothing to do with bringing about freedom. Metternich consid- 
ered guaranteeing rights to be a paradox: “Things which ought to be 
taken for granted lose their force when they emerge in the form of 
arbitrary pronouncements Objects mistakenly made subject to legisla- 


84 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


tion result only in the limitation, if not the complete annulment, of that 
which is attempted to be safeguarded .” 6 

Some of Metternich’s maxims were self-serving rationalizations of the 
practices of the Austrian Empire, which was incapable of adjusting to 
the emerging new world. But Metternich also reflected the rationalist 
conviction that laws and rights existed in nature and not by fiat. His 
formative experience had been the French Revolution, which started with 
the proclamation of the Rights of Man and ended with the Reign of Terror. 
Wilson emerged from a far more benign national experience and, fifteen 
years before the rise of modern totalitarianism, could not conceive of 
aberrations in the popular will. 

In the post-Vienna period, Metternich played the decisive role in man- 
aging the international system and in interpreting the requirements of 
the Holy Alliance. Metternich was forced to assume this role because 
Austria was in the direct path of every storm, and its domestic institutions 
were less and less compatible with the national and liberal trends of the 
century. Prussia loomed over Austria’s position in Germany, and Russia 
over its Slavic populations in the Balkans. And there was always France, 
eager to reclaim Richelieu’s legacy in Central Europe. Metternich knew 
that, if these dangers were permitted to turn into tests of strength, Austria 
would exhaust itself, whatever the outcome of any particular conflict. His 
policy, therefore, was to avoid crises by building a moral consensus and 
to deflect those which could not be avoided by discreedy backing which- 
ever nation was willing to bear the brunt of the confrontation — Great 
Britain vis-a-vis France in the Low Countries, Great Britain and France vis- 
a-vis Russia in the Balkans, the smaller states vis-a-vis Prussia in Germany. 

Metternich’s extraordinary diplomatic skill permitted him to translate 
familiar diplomatic verities into operational foreign policy principles. He 
managed to convince Austria’s two closest allies, each of which repre- 
sented a geopolitical threat to the Austrian Empire, that the ideological 
danger posed by revolution outweighed their strategic opportunities. Had 
Prussia sought to exploit German nationalism, it could have challenged 
Austrian pre-eminence in Germany a generation before Bismarck. Had 
Tsars Alexander I and Nicholas I only considered solely Russia’s geopoliti- 
cal opportunities, they would have exploited the disintegration of the 
Ottoman Empire far more decisively to Austria’s peril — as their succes- 
sors would do later in the century. Both refrained from pushing their 
advantage because it ran counter to the dominant principle of main- 
taining the status quo. Austria, seemingly on its deathbed after Napoleon’s 
onslaught, was given a new lease on life by the Metternich system, which 
enabled it to survive for another hundred years. 


85 



Diplomacy 


The man who saved this anachronistic empire and guided its policy for 
nearly fifty years did not even visit Austria until he was thirteen years old 
or live there until he was seventeen. 7 Prince Klemens von Metternich’s 
father had been governor general of the Rhineland, then a Habsburg 
possession. A cosmopolitan figure, Metternich was always more comfort- 
able speaking French than German. “For a long time now,” he wrote to 
Wellington in 1824, “Europe has had for me the quality of a fatherland 
[ patrie ].” 8 Contemporary opponents sneered at his righteous maxims and 
polished epigrams. But Voltaire and Kant would have understood his 
views. A rationalist product of the Enlightenment, he found himself pro- 
pelled into a revolutionary struggle which was foreign to his tempera- 
ment, and into becoming the leading minister of a state under siege 
whose structure he could not modify. 

Sobriety of spirit and moderation of objective were the Metternich 
style: “Little given to abstract ideas, we accept things as they are and we 
attempt to the maximum of our ability to protect ourselves against delu- 
sions about realities.” 9 And, “with phrases which on close examination 
dissolve into thin air, such as the defense of civilization, nothing tangible 
can be defined,” 10 

With such attitudes, Metternich strove to avoid being swept away by the 
emotion of the moment. As soon as Napoleon was defeated in Russia, and 
before Russian troops had even reached Central Europe, Metternich had 
identified Russia as a potential long-term threat. At a time when Austria’s 
neighbors were concentrating on liberation from French rule, he made 
Austria’s participation in the anti-Napoleon coalition dependent on the 
elaboration of war aims compatible with the survival of his rickety em- 
pire. Metternich’s attitude was the exact opposite of the position taken by 
the democracies during the Second World War, when they found them- 
selves in comparable circumstances vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. Like Cas- 
tlereagh and Pitt, Metternich believed that a strong Central Europe was 
the prerequisite to European stability. Determined to avoid tests of 
strength if at all possible, Metternich was as concerned with establishing 
a moderating style as he was with accumulating raw power: 

The attitude of the [European] powers differs as their geographical 
situation. France and Russia have but a single frontier and this hardly 
vulnerable. The Rhine with its triple line of fortresses assures the re- 
pose of . . . France; a frightful climate . . . makes the Niemen a no less 
safe frontier for Russia. Austria and Prussia find themselves exposed on 
all sides to attack by their neighbouring powers. Continuously menaced 
by the preponderance of these two powers, Austria and Prussia can find 
tranquillity only in a wise and measured policy, in relations of goodwill 
among each other and with their neighbours 11 


86 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


Though Austria needed Russia as a hedge against France, it was wary of 
its impetuous ally, and especially of the Tsar’s crusading bent. Talleyrand 
said of Tsar Alexander I that he was not for nothing the son of the mad 
Tsar Paul. Metternich described Alexander as a “strange combination of 
masculine virtues and feminine weaknesses. Too weak for true ambition, 
but too strong for pure vanity .” 12 

For Metternich, the problem posed by Russia was not so much how to 
contain its aggressiveness — an endeavor which would have exhausted 
Austria — as how to temper its ambitions. “Alexander desires the peace of 
the world,” reported an Austrian diplomat, “but not for the sake of peace 
and its blessings; rather for his own sake; not unconditionally, but with 
mental reservations: he must remain the arbiter of this peace; from him 
must emanate the repose and happiness of the world and all of Europe 
must recognize that this repose is his work, that it is dependent on his 
goodwill and that it can be disturbed by his whim. . . ,” 13 

Castlereagh and Metternich parted company over how to contain a 
mercurial and meddlesome Russia. As the Foreign Minister of an island 
power far from the scene of confrontation, Castlereagh was prepared to 
resist only overt attacks, and even then the attacks had to threaten the 
equilibrium. Metternich’s country', on the other hand, lay in the center of 
the Continent and could not take such chances. Precisely because Metter- 
nich distrusted Alexander, he insisted on staying close to him and concen- 
trated on keeping threats from his direction from ever arising. “If one 
cannon is fired,” he wrote, “Alexander will escape us at the head of his 
retinue and then there will be no limit any longer to what he will consider 
his divinely ordained laws .” 14 

To dilute Alexander’s zealousness, Metternich pursued a two-pronged 
strategy. Under his leadership, Austria was in the vanguard of the fight 
against nationalism, though he was adamant about not permitting Austria 
to be too exposed or to engage in unilateral acts. He was even less 
inclined to encourage others to act on their own, partly because he feared 
Russia’s missionary' zeal could turn into expansionism. For Metternich, 
moderation was a philosophical virtue and a practical necessity. In his 
instructions to an Austrian ambassador, he once wrote: “It is more im- 
portant to eliminate the claims of others than to press our own. . . . We 
will obtain much in proportion as we ask little .” 15 Whenever possible, he 
tried to temper the Tsar’s crusading schemes by involving him in time- 
consuming consultations and by limiting him to what the European con- 
sensus would tolerate. 

The second prong of Metternich’s strategy was conservative unity. 
Whenever action became unavoidable, Metternich would resort to a jug- 
gling act which he once described as follows: “Austria considers every- 


87 



Diplomacy 


thing with reference to the substance. Russia wants above all the form-, 

Britain wants the substance without the form It will be our task to 

combine the impossibilities of Britain with the modes of Russia .” 16 Metter- 
nich’s dexterity enabled Austria to control the pace of events for a genera- 
tion by turning Russia, a country he feared, into a partner on the basis of 
the unity of conservative interests, and Great Britain, which he trusted, 
into a last resort for resisting challenges to the balance of power. The 
inevitable outcome, however, would merely be delayed. Even so, to have 
preserved an ancient state on the basis of values inconsistent with the 
dominant trends all around it for a full century is not a mean achievement. 

Metternich’s dilemma was that, the closer he moved toward the Tsar, 
the more he risked his British connection; and the more he risked that, 
the closer he had to move toward the Tsar to avoid isolation. For Metter- 
nich, the ideal combination would have been British support to preserve 
the territorial balance, and Russian support to quell domestic upheaval — 
the Quadruple Alliance for geopolitical security, and the Holy Alliance for 
domestic stability. 

But as time passed and the memory of Napoleon faded, that combina- 
tion became increasingly difficult to sustain. The more the alliances ap- 
proached a system of collective security and European government, the 
more Great Britain felt compelled to dissociate itself from it. And the 
more Great Britain dissociated itself, the more dependent Austria became 
on Russia, hence the more rigidly it defended conservative values. This 
was a vicious circle that could not be broken. 

However sympathetic Castlereagh might have been to Austria’s prob- 
lems, he was unable to induce Great Britain to address potential, as 
opposed to actual, dangers. “When the Territorial Balance of Europe is 
disturbed,” avowed Castlereagh, “She [Britain] can interfere with effect, 
but She is the last Government in Europe which can be expected, or can 
venture to commit Herself on any question of an abstract character. . . . 
We shall be found in our Place when actual danger menaces the System 
of Europe; but this Country cannot, and will not, act upon abstract and 
speculative Principles of Precaution .” 17 Yet the crux of Metternich’s prob- 
lem was that necessity obliged him to treat as practical what Great Britain 
considered abstract and speculative. Domestic upheaval happened to be 
the danger Austria found the least manageable. 

To soften the disagreement in principle, Castlereagh proposed peri- 
odic meetings, or congresses, of the foreign ministers to review the Euro- 
pean state of affairs. What became known as the Congress system sought 
to forge a consensus on the issues confronting Europe and to pave the 
way for dealing with them on a multilateral basis. Great Britain, however, 
was not comfortable with a system of European government, because it 


88 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


came too close to the unified Europe that the British had consistently 
opposed. Traditional British policy apart, no British government had ever 
undertaken a permanent commitment to review events as they arose 
without confronting a specific threat. Participating in a European govern- 
ment was no more attractive to British public opinion than the League of 
Nations would be to Americans a hundred years later, and for much the 
same reasons. 

The British Cabinet made its reserve quite evident as early as the first 
such conference, the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818. Castlereagh 
was dispatched with these extraordinarily grudging instructions: “We ap- 
prove [a general declaration] on this occasion, and with difficulty too, by 
assuring [the secondary powers] that . . . periodic meetings . . . are to be 
confined to one . . . subject, or even ... to one power, France, and no 
engagement to interfere in any manner in which the Law of Nations 

does not justify interference Our true policy has always been not to 

interfere except in great emergencies and then with commanding 
force.” 18 Great Britain wanted France kept in check but, beyond that, the 
twin fears of “continental entanglements” and a unified Europe prevailed 
in London. 

There was only one occasion when Great Britain found Congress diplo- 
macy compatible with its objectives. During the Greek Revolution of 1821, 
England interpreted the Tsar’s desire to protea the Christian population 
of the collapsing Ottoman Empire as the first stage of Russia’s attempt to 
conquer Egypt. With British strategic interests at stake, Castlereagh did 
not hesitate to appeal to the Tsar in the name of the very allied unity he 
had heretofore sought to restrict to containing France. Characteristically, 
he elaborated a distinaion between theoretical and praaical issues: “The 
question of Turkey is of a totally different character and one which in 
England we regard not as a theoretical but a praaical consideration. . . ,” 19 

But Castlereagh’s appeal to the Alliance served above all to demonstrate 
its inherent brittleness. An alliance in which one partner treats his own 
strategic interests as the sole practical issue confers no additional security 
on its members. For it provides no obligation beyond what considera- 
tions of national interest would have impelled in any event. Metternich 
undoubtedly drew comfort from Castlereagh’s obvious personal sympa- 
thy for his objeaives, and even for the Congress system itself. Castlereagh, 
it was said by one of Austria’s diplomats, was “like a great lover of music 
who is at Church; he wishes to applaud but he dare not.” 20 But if even 
the most European-minded of British statesmen dared not applaud what 
he believed in, Great Britain’s role in the Concert of Europe was destined 
to be transitory and ineffective. 

Somewhat like Wilson and his League of Nations a century later, Cas- 


89 



Diplomacy 


tlereagh’s efforts to persuade Great Britain to participate in a system 
of European congresses went far beyond what English representative 
institutions could tolerate on either philosophical or strategic grounds. 
Castlereagh was convinced, as Wilson would be, that the danger of new 
aggression could best be avoided if his country joined some permanent 
European forum that dealt with threats before they developed into crises. 
He understood Europe better than most of his British contemporaries 
and knew that the newly created balance would require careful tending. 
He thought that he had devised a solution Great Britain could support, 
because it did not go beyond a series of discussion meetings of the 
foreign ministers of the four victors and had no obligatory features. 

But even discussion meetings smacked too much of European govern- 
ment for the British Cabinet. Indeed, the Congress system never even 
cleared its initial hurdle. When Castlereagh attended the first conference 
at Aix-la-Chapelle in 1818, France was admitted to the Congress system 
and Great Britain made its exit from it. The Cabinet refused to let Castle- 
reagh attend any further European congresses, which subsequently took 
place at Troppau in 1820, at Laibach in 1821, and at Verona in 1822. Great 
Britain remained aloof from the Congress system, which its own Foreign 
Secretary had devised, just as, a century later, the United States would 
distance itself from the League of Nations, which its president had pro- 
posed. In each .case, the attempt by the leader of the most powerful 
country to create a general system of collective security failed because of 
domestic inhibitions and historic traditions. 

Both Wilson and Castlereagh believed that the international order es- 
tablished after a catastrophic war could only be protected by the active 
participation of all of the key members of the international community 
and especially of their own countries. To Castlereagh and Wilson, security 
was collective; if any nation was victimized, in the end all would become 
victims. With security thus perceived as seamless, all states had a common 
interest in resisting aggression, and an even greater interest in preventing 
it. In Castlereagh ’s view, Great Britain, whatever its views on specific 
issues, had a genuine interest in the preservation of general peace and in 
the maintenance of the balance of power. Like Wilson, Castlereagh 
thought that the best way to defend that interest was to have a hand 
in shaping the decisions affecting international order and in organizing 
resistance to violations of the peace. 

The weakness of collective security is that interests are rarely uniform, 
and that security is rarely seamless. Members of a general system of 
collective security are therefore more likely to agree on inaction than on 
joint action; they either will be held together by glittering generalities, or 


90 



The Concert of Europe. Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


may witness the defection of the most powerful member, who feels the 
most secure and therefore least needs the system. Neither Wilson nor 
Castlereagh was able to bring his country into a system of collective 
security because their respective societies did not feel threatened by 
foreseeable dangers and thought that they could deal with them alone or, 
if need be, find allies at the last moment. To them, participating in the 
League of Nations or the European Congress system compounded risks 
without enhancing security. 

There was one huge difference between the two Anglo-Saxon states- 
men, however. Castlereagh was out of tune not only with his contempo- 
raries but with the entire thrust of modern British foreign policy. He left 
no legacy; no British statesman has used Castlereagh as a model. Wilson 
not only responded to the wellsprings of American motivation, but took 
it to a new and higher level. All his successors have been Wilsonian to 
some degree, and subsequent American foreign policy has been shaped 
by his maxims. 

Lord Stewart, the British “observer” permitted to attend the various 
European congresses, who was Castlereagh’s half-brother, spent most of 
his energy defining the limits of Great Britain’s involvement rather than 
contributing to a European consensus. At Troppau, he submitted a memo- 
randum which affirmed the right to self-defense but insisted that Great 
Britain would “not charge itself as a member of the Alliance with the 
moral responsibility of administering a general European Police.” 21 At 
the Congress of Laibach, Lord Stewart was obliged to reiterate that Great 
Britain would never engage itself against “speculative” dangers. Castle- 
reagh himself had set forth the British position in a state paper of May 5, 
1820. The Quadruple Alliance, he affirmed, was an alliance for the “libera- 
tion of a great proportion of the Continent of Europe from the military 

dominion of France It never was, however, intended as an Union for 

the Government of the World or for the Superintendence of the Internal 
Affairs of other States.” 22 

In the end, Castlereagh found himself trapped between his convictions 
and his domestic necessities. From this untenable situation, he could see 
no exit. “Sir,” Castlereagh said at his last interview with the King, “it is 
necessary to say goodbye to Europe; you and I alone know it and have 
saved it; no one after me understands the affairs of the Continent.” 23 Four 
days later, he committed suicide. 

As Austria grew more and more dependent on Russia, Metternich’s 
most perplexing question became how long his appeals to the Tsar’s 
conservative principles could restrain Russia from exploiting its opportu- 
nities in the Balkans and at the periphery of Europe. The answer turned 


91 



Diplomacy 


out to be nearly three decades, during which time Metternich dealt with 
revolutions in Naples, Spain, and Greece while effectively maintaining a 
European consensus and avoiding Russian intervention in the Balkans. 

But the Eastern Question would not go away. In essence, it was the 
result of independence struggles in the Balkans as the various nationali- 
ties tried to break loose of Turkish rule. The quandary this posed for the 
Metternich system was that it clashed with that system’s commitment to 
maintaining the status quo, and that the independence movements which 
today were aimed at Turkey would tomorrow attack Austria. Moreover, 
the Tsar, who was the most committed to legitimacy, was also the most 
eager to intervene, but nobody — certainly not in London or Vienna — 
believed that the Tsar would preserve the status quo after his armies had 
been launched. 

For a time, a mutual interest in cushioning the shock of the collapsing 
Ottoman Empire sustained a warm relationship with Great Britain and 
Austria. However little the English cared about particular Balkan issues, a 
Russian advance toward the Straits was perceived as a threat to British 
interests in the Mediterranean, and encountered tenacious resistance. 
Metternich never participated directly in these British efforts to oppose 
Russian expansionism, much as he welcomed them. His careful and, 
above all, anonymous diplomacy — affirming Europe’s unity, flattering the 
Russians, and cajoling the British — enabled Austria to preserve its Russian 
option while other states bore the brunt of thwarting Russian expan- 
sionism. 

Metternich’s removal from the scene in 1848 marked the beginning of 
the end of the high-wire act by which Austria had used the unity of 
conservative interests to maintain the Vienna settlement. To be sure, legit- 
imacy could not have compensated indefinitely for the steady decline in 
Austria’s geopolitical position or for the growing incompatibility between 
its domestic institutions and dominant national tendencies. But nuance is 
the essence of statesmanship. Metternich had finessed the Eastern Ques- 
tion but his successors, unable to adapt Austria’s domestic institutions to 
the times, tried to compensate by bringing Austrian diplomacy into line 
with the emerging trend of power politics, unrestrained by a concept of 
legitimacy. It was to be the undoing of the international order. 

So it happened that the Concert of Europe was ultimately shattered on 
the anvil of the Eastern Question. In 1854, the Great Powers were at war 
for the first time since the days of Napoleon. Ironically, this war, the 
Crimean War, long condemned by historians as a senseless and utterly 
avoidable affair, was precipitated not by Russia, Great Britain, or Austria 
— countries with vast interests in the Eastern Question — but by France. 


92 



The Concert of Europe Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


In 1852, the French Emperor Napoleon III, having just come to power 
by a coup, persuaded the Turkish Sultan to grant him the sobriquet of 
Protector of the Christians in the Ottoman Empire, a role the Russian Tsar 
traditionally reserved for himself. Nicholas I was enraged that Napoleon, 
whom he considered an illegitimate upstart, should presume to step into 
Russia’s shoes as protector of Balkan Slavs, and demanded equal status 
with France. When the Sultan rebuffed the Russian emissary', Russia broke 
off diplomatic relations. Lord Palmerston, who shaped British foreign 
policy during the mid-nineteenth century, was morbidly suspicious of 
Russia and urged the dispatch of the Royal Navy to Besika Bay, just outside 
the Dardanelles. The Tsar still continued in the spirit of the Metternich 
system: “The four of you,” he said, referring to the other Great Powers, 
“could dictate to me, but this will never happen. I can count on Berlin 
and Vienna.” 24 To show his lack of concern, Nicholas ordered the occupa- 
tion of the principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia (present-day Roma- 
nia). 

Austria, which had the most to lose from a war, proposed the obvious 
solution — that France and Russia act as joint protectors of the Ottoman 
Christians. Palmerston was eager for neither outcome. To strengthen 
Great Britain’s bargaining position, he sent the Royal Navy to the entrance 
of the Black Sea. This encouraged Turkey to declare war on Russia. Great 
Britain and France backed Turkey. 

The real causes of the war were deeper, however. Religious claims 
were in fact pretexts for political and strategic designs. Nicholas was 
pursuing the ancient Russian dream of gaining Constantinople and the 
Straits. Napoleon III saw an opportunity to end France’s isolation and to 
break up the Holy Alliance by weakening Russia. Palmerston sought some 
pretext to end Russia’s drive toward the Straits once and for all. With the 
outbreak of war, British warships entered the Black Sea and began to 
destroy the Russian Black Sea fleet. An Anglo-French force landed in the 
Crimea to seize the Russian naval base of Sevastopol. 

These events spelled nothing but complexity for Austria’s leaders. They 
attached importance to the traditional friendship with Russia while fear- 
ing that Russia’s advance in the Balkans might increase the restlessness of 
Austria’s Slavic populations. But they feared that siding with their old 
friend Russia in the Crimea would give France a pretext for attacking 
Austria’s Italian territories. 

At first, Austria declared neutrality, which was the sensible course. But 
the new Austrian Foreign Minister, Count Buol, found inactivity too nerve- 
racking and the French threat to Austria’s possessions in Italy too unset- 
tling. As the British and French armies were besieging Sevastopol, Austria 


93 



Diplomacy 


presented an ultimatum to the Tsar, demanding that Russia retreat from 
Moldavia and Wallachia. That was the decisive factor in ending the Cri- 
mean War — at least that is what Russian leaders would think ever after. 

Austria had jettisoned Nicholas I and a steadfast friendship with Russia 
dating back to the Napoleonic Wars. Frivolity compounded by panic 
caused Metternich’s successors to throw away the legacy of conservative 
unity that had been accumulated so carefully and at times painfully for 
over a generation. For once Austria cut itself loose from the shackles of 
shared values, it also freed Russia to conduct its own policy strictly on the 
basis of geopolitical merit. Pursuing such a course, Russia was bound to 
clash with Austria over the future of the Balkans and, in time, to seek to 
undermine the Austrian Empire. 

The reason the Vienna settlement had worked for fifty years was that 
the three Eastern powers — Prussia, Russia, and Austria — had seen their 
unity as the essential barrier to revolutionary chaos and to French domi- 
nation of Europe. But in the Crimean War, Austria (“the chamber of peers 
of Europe,” as Talleyrand had called it) maneuvered itself into an uneasy 
alliance with Napoleon III, who was eager to undermine Austria in Italy, 
and Great Britain, which was unwilling to engage in European causes. 
Austria thereby liberated Russia and Prussia, its acquisitive erstwhile part- 
ners in the Holy Alliance, to pursue their own undiluted national inter- 
ests. Prussia exacted its price by forcing Austria to withdraw from 
Germany, while Russia’s growing hostility in the Balkans turned into one 
of the triggers of the First World War and led to Austria’s ultimate collapse. 

When faced with the realities of power politics, Austria had failed to 
realize that its salvation had been the European commitment to legiti- 
macy. The concept of the unity of conservative interests had transcended 
national borders and thus tended to mitigate the confrontations of power 
politics. Nationalism had the opposite effect, exalting the national interest, 
heightening rivalries, and raising the risks for everyone. Austria had 
thrown itself into a contest which, given all its vulnerabilities, it could not 
possibly win. 

Within five years of the end of the Crimean War, the Italian nationalist 
leader Camillo Cavour began the process of expelling Austria from Italy 
by provoking a war with Austria, backed by a French alliance and Russian 
acquiescence, both of which would previously have seemed inconceiv- 
able. Within another five years, Bismarck would defeat Austria in a war 
for predominance in Germany. Once again, Russia stood aloof and France 
did the same, albeit reluctantly. In Metternich’s day, the Concert of Eu- 
rope would have consulted and controlled these upheavals. Henceforth 
diplomacy would rely more on naked power than on shared values. Peace 


94 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 

was maintained for another fifty years. But with each decade, tensions 
multiplied and arms races intensified. 

Great Britain fared quite differently in an international system driven 
by power politics. For one thing, it had never relied on the Congress 
system for its security; for Great Britain, the new pattern of international 
relations was more like business as usual. In the course of the nineteenth 
century, Great Britain became the dominant country in Europe. To be 
sure, it was strong enough to stand alone and had the advantages of 
geographic isolation and imperviousness to domestic upheavals on the 
Continent. But it also had the benefit of steady leaders pursuing an unsen- 
timental commitment to the national interest. 

Castlereagh’s successors did not understand the Continent nearly as 
well as he had. But they had a surer grasp of what constituted the essential 
British national interest, and they pursued it with extraordinary skill and 
persistence. George Canning, Castlereagh’s immediate successor, lost no 
time in eliminating the last few ties through which Castlereagh had main- 
tained his influence, however remote, on the European Congress system. 
In 1821, the year before he succeeded Castlereagh, Canning had called 
for a policy of “neutrality in word and deed.” 25 “Let us not,” he said, “in 
the foolish spirit of romance, suppose that we alone could regenerate 
Europe.” 26 Then, after becoming Foreign Secretary, he left no doubt that 
his guiding principle was the national interest, which, in his view, was 
incompatible with permanent engagement in Europe: 

. . . intimately connected as we are with the system of Europe, it does 
not follow that we are therefore called upon to mix ourselves on every 
occasion, with a restless and meddling activity, in the concerns of the 
nations which surround us. 27 

In other words, Great Britain would reserve the right to steer its own 
course according to the merits of each case and guided only by its 
national interest, a policy which made allies either auxiliaries or irrel- 
evant. 

Palmerston explained the British definition of national interest as fol- 
lows in 1856: “When people ask me . . . for what is called a policy, the 
only answer is that we mean to do what may seem to be best, upon each 
occasion as it arises, making the Interests of Our Country one’s guiding 
principle.” 28 Half a century later, the official description of British foreign 
policy had not gained much in the way of precision, as reflected in 
this explanation by Foreign Secretary Sir Edward Grey: “British Foreign 
Ministers have been guided by what seemed to them to be the immediate 


95 



Diplomacy 


interest of this country, without making elaborate calculations for the 
future.” 29 

In most other countries, statements such as these would have been 
ridiculed as tautological — we do what is best because we consider it best. 
In Great Britain, they were considered illuminating; very rarely was there 
a call to define that much-used phrase “national interest”: “We have no 
eternal allies and no permanent enemies,” said Palmerston. Great Britain 
required no formal strategy because its leaders understood the British 
interest so well and so viscerally that they could act spontaneously on 
each situation as it arose, confident that their public would follow. In the 
words of Palmerston: “Our interests are eternal, and those interests it is 
our duty to follow.” 30 

British leaders were more likely to be clear about what they were not 
prepared to defend than to identify a casus belli in advance. They were 
even more reluctant to spell out positive aims, perhaps because they 
liked the status quo well enough. Convinced that they would recognize 
the British national interest when they saw it, British leaders felt no need 
to elaborate it in advance. They preferred to await actual cases — a posi- 
tion impossible for the Continental countries to adopt, because they were 
those actual cases. 

The British view of security was not unlike the view of American isola- 
tionists, in that Great Britain felt impervious to all but cataclysmic upheav- 
als. But America and Great Britain differed when it came to the 
relationship between peace and domestic structure. British leaders did 
not in any sense consider the spread of representative institutions as a 
key to peace in the way their American counterparts generally did, nor 
did they feel concerned about institutions different from their own. 

Thus, in 1841, Palmerston spelled out for the British ambassador in 
St. Petersburg what Great Britain would resist by force of arms, and why 
it would not resist purely domestic changes: 

One of the general principles which Her Majesty’s Government wish to 
observe as a guide for their conduct in dealing with the relations be- 
tween England and other States, is, that changes which foreign Nations 
may chuse to make in their internal Constitution and form of Govern- 
ment, are to be looked upon as matters with which England has no 

business to interfere by force of arms 

But an attempt of one Nation to seize and to appropriate to itself 
territory which belongs to another Nation, is a different matter; because 
such an attempt leads to a derangement of the existing Balance of 
Power, and by altering the relative strength of States, may tend to create 
danger to other Powers; and such attempts therefore, the British Gov- 
ernment holds itself at full liberty to resist. . . , 31 


96 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


Without exception, British ministers were concerned above all with pre- 
serving their country’s freedom of action. In 1841, Palmerston reiterated 
Great Britain’s abhorrence of abstract cases: 

... it is not usual for England to enter into engagements with reference 
to cases which have not actually arisen, or which are not immediately 
in prospect 32 

Nearly thirty years later, Gladstone brought up the same principle in a 
letter to Queen Victoria: 

England should keep entire in her own hands the means of estimating 
her own obligations upon the various states of facts as they arise; she 
should not foreclose and narrow her own liberty of choice by declara- 
tions made to other Powers, in their real or supposed interests, of 
which they would claim to be at least joint interpreters 33 

Insisting on freedom of action, British statesmen as a rule rejected all 
variations on the theme of collective security. What later came to be called 
“splendid isolation” reflected England’s conviction that it stood to lose 
more than it could gain from alliances. So aloof an approach could be 
entertained only by a country that was sufficiently strong to stand alone, 
that foresaw no dangers for which it might need the assistance of allies, 
and that felt certain that any extremity threatening it would threaten its 
potential allies even more. Great Britain’s role as the nation that main- 
tained the European equilibrium gave it all the options its leaders either 
wanted or needed. This policy was sustainable because it strove for no 
territorial gains in Europe; England could pick and choose the European 
quarrels in which to intervene because its only European interest was 
equilibrium (however voracious the British appetite for colonial acquisi- 
tions overseas). 

Nonetheless, Great Britain’s “splendid isolation” did not keep it from 
entering into temporary arrangements with other countries to deal with 
special circumstances. As a sea power without a large standing army, 
Great Britain occasionally had to cooperate with a continental ally, which 
it always preferred to choose as the need arose. On such occasions British 
leaders could show themselves remarkably impervious to past animosi- 
ties. In the course of Belgium’s secession from Holland in 1830, Palmer- 
ston first threatened France with war if it sought to dominate the new 
state, then, a few years later, offered to ally with it to guarantee Belgium’s 
independence: “England alone cannot carry her points on the Continent; 
she must have allies as instruments to work with.” 34 


97 



Diplomacy 


Of course, Great Britain’s various ad hoc allies had objectives of their 
own, which usually involved an extension of influence or territory in 
Europe. When they went beyond what England considered appropriate, 
England switched sides or organized new coalitions against erstwhile 
allies in defense of the equilibrium. Its unsentimental persistence and 
self-centered determination earned Great Britain the epithet “Perfidious 
Albion.” This type of diplomacy may not have reflected a particularly 
elevated attitude, but it preserved the peace of Europe, especially after 
the Metternich system began fraying at the edges. 

The nineteenth century marked the apogee of British influence. Great 
Britain was self-confident and had every right to be. It was the leading 
industrial nation and the Royal Navy commanded the seas. In an age of 
domestic upheavals, British internal politics were remarkably serene. 
When it came to the big issues of the nineteenth century — intervention 
or nonintervention, defense of the status quo or cooperating with change 
— British leaders refused to be bound by dogma. In the war for Greek 
independence in the 1820s, Great Britain sympathized with Greece’s in- 
dependence from Ottoman rule as long as doing so did not threaten its 
strategic position in the Eastern Mediterranean by increasing Russian 
influence. But by 1840, Great Britain would intervene to contain Russia, 
thereby supporting the status quo in the Ottoman Empire. In the Hungar- 
ian Revolution of 1848, Great Britain, formally noninterventionist, in fact 
welcomed Russia’s restoration of the status quo. When Italy revolted 
against Habsburg rule in the 1850s, Great Britain was sympathetic but 
non interventionist. To defend the balance of power, Great Britain was 
neither categorically interventionist nor noninterventionist, neither a bul- 
wark of the Viennese order nor a revisionist power. Its style was relent- 
lessly pragmatic, and the British people took pride in their ability to 
muddle through. 

Yet any pragmatic policy — indeed, especially a pragmatic policy — must 
be based on some fixed principle in order to prevent tactical skill from 
dissipating into a random thrashing about. And the fixed principle of 
British foreign policy, whether acknowledged or not, was its role as pro- 
tector of the balance of power, which in general meant supporting the 
weaker against the stronger. By Palmerston’s time, the balance of power 
had grown into such an immutable principle of British policy that it 
needed no theoretical defense; whatever policy was being pursued at any 
given moment became inevitably described in terms of protecting the 
balance of power. Extraordinary flexibility was conjoined to a number of 
fixed and practical objectives. For instance, the determination to keep the 
Low Countries out of the hands of a major power did not change between 


98 



The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


the time of William III and the outbreak of World War I. In 1870, Disraeli 
reaffirmed that principle: 

It had always been held by the Government of this country that it was 
for the interest of England that the countries on the European Coast 
extending from Dunkirk and Ostend to the islands of the North Sea 
should be possessed by free and flourishing communities, practicing 
the arts of peace, enjoying the rights of liberty and following those 
pursuits of commerce which tend to the civilization of man, and should 
not be in the possession of a great military Power. . . 35 

It was a measure of how isolated German leaders had become that they 
were genuinely surprised when, in 1914, Great Britain reacted to the 
German invasion of Belgium with a declaration of war. 

Well into the nineteenth century, the preservation of Austria was con- 
sidered an important British objective. In the eighteenth century, Marl- 
borough, Carteret, and Pitt had fought several wars to prevent France 
from weakening Austria. Though Austria had less to fear from French 
aggression in the nineteenth century, the British still viewed Austria as a 
useful counterweight to Russian expansion toward the Straits. When the 
Revolution of 1848 threatened to cause the disintegration of Austria, Palm- 
erston said: 

Austria stands in the centre of Europe, a barrier against encroachment 
on the one side, and against invasion on the other. The political inde- 
pendence and liberties of Europe are bound up, in my opinion, with 
the maintenance and integrity of Austria as a great European Power; 
and therefore anything which tends by direct, or even remote, contin- 
gency, to weaken and to cripple Austria, but still more to reduce her 
from the position of a first-rate Power to that of a secondary State, must 
be a great calamity to Europe, and one which every Englishman ought 
to deprecate, and to try to prevent. 36 

After the Revolution of 1848, Austria became progressively weaker and its 
policy increasingly erratic, diminishing its usefulness as a key element in 
British policy in the Eastern Mediterranean. 

The focus of England’s policy was to prevent Russia from occupying 
the Dardanelles. Austro-Russian rivalries largely involved Russian designs 
on Austria’s Slavic provinces, which did not seriously concern Great Brit- 
ain, while control of the Dardanelles was not a vital Austrian interest. 
Great Britain therefore came to judge Austria an unsuitable counter- 
weight to Russia. This was why Great Britain stood by when Austria was 


99 



Diplomacy 


defeated by Piedmont in Italy and by Prussia in the contest over primacy 
in Germany — an indifference which would not have been conceivable a 
generation before. After the turn of the century, fear of Germany would 
dominate British policy, and Austria, Germany’s ally, for the first time 
emerged as an opponent in British calculations. 

In the nineteenth century, no one would have thought it possible that 
one day Great Britain would be allied with Russia. In Palmerston’s view, 
Russia was “pursuing a system of universal aggression on all sides, partly 
from the personal character of the Emperor [Nicholas], partly from the 
permanent system of the government.” 37 Twenty-five years later, this view 
was echoed by Lord Clarendon, who argued that the Crimean War was “a 
battle of civilization against barbarism.” 38 Great Britain spent the better 
part of the century attempting to check Russian expansion into Persia and 
on the approaches to Constantinople and India. It would take decades of 
German bellicosity and insensitivity to shift the major British security 
concern to Germany, which did not finally occur until after the turn of 
the century. 

British governments changed more frequently than those of the so- 
called Eastern Powers; none of Britain’s major political figures — Palmer- 
ston, Gladstone, and Disraeli — enjoyed uninterrupted tenures, as did 
Metternich, Nicholas I, and Bismarck. Still, Great Britain maintained an 
extraordinary consistency of purpose. Once embarked on a particular 
course, it would pursue it with unrelenting tenacity and dogged reliabil- 
ity, which enabled Great Britain to exert a decisive influence on behalf of 
tranquillity in Europe. 

One cause of Great Britain’s single-mindedness in times of crisis was 
the representative nature of its political institutions. Since 1700, public 
opinion had played an important role in British foreign policy. No other 
country in eighteenth-century Europe had an “opposition” point of view 
with respect to foreign policy; in Great Britain, it was inherent in the 
system. In the eighteenth century, the Tories as a rule represented the 
King’s foreign policy, which leaned toward intervention in Continental 
disputes; the Whigs, like Sir Robert Walpole, preferred to retain a mea- 
sure of aloofness from quarrels on the Continent and sought greater 
emphasis on overseas expansion. By the nineteenth century, their roles 
had been reversed. The Whigs, like Palmerston, represented an activist 
policy, while the Tories, like Derby or Salisbury, were wary of foreign 
entanglements. Radicals such as Richard Cobden were allied with the 
Conservatives in advocating a noninterventionist British posture. 

Because British foreign policy grew out of open debates, the British 
people displayed extraordinary unity in times of war. On the other hand, 
so openly partisan a foreign policy made it possible — though highly un- 


100 



The Concert of Europe. Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 


usual — for foreign policy to be reversed when a prime minister was 
replaced. For instance, Great Britain’s support for Turkey in the 1870s 
ended abruptly when Gladstone, who regarded the Turks as morally 
reprehensible, defeated Disraeli in the election of 1880. 

At all times, Great Britain treated its representative institutions as 
unique unto itself. Its policies on the Continent were always justified in 
terms of the British national interest and not ideology. Whenever Great 
Britain expressed sympathy for a revolution, as it did in Italy in 1848, it 
did so on eminently practical grounds. Thus, Palmerston approvingly 
quoted Canning’s own pragmatic adage: “That those who have checked 
improvement because it is innovation, will one day or other be com- 
pelled to accept innovation when it has ceased to be improvement.” 39 
But this was advice based on experience, not a call for the dissemination 
of British values or institutions. Throughout the nineteenth century, Great 
Britain judged other countries by their foreign policies and, but for a brief 
Gladstonian interlude, remained indifferent to their domestic structures. 

Though Great Britain and America shared a certain aloofness from day- 
to-day involvement in international affairs, Great Britain justified its own 
version of isolationism on dramatically different grounds. America pro- 
claimed its democratic institutions as an example for the rest of the world; 
Great Britain treated its parliamentary institutions as devoid of relevance 
to other societies. America came to believe that the spread of democracy 
would ensure peace; indeed, that a reliable peace could be achieved in 
no other way. Great Britain might prefer a particular domestic structure 
but would run no risks on its behalf. 

In 1848, Palmerston subordinated Great Britain’s historic misgivings 
about the overthrow of the French monarchy and the emergence of a 
new Bonaparte by invoking this practical rule of British statecraft: “The 
invariable principle on which England acts is to acknowledge as the organ 
of every nation that organ which each nation may deliberately choose to 
have.” 40 

Palmerston was the principal architect of Great Britain’s foreign policy 
for nearly thirty years. In 1841, Metternich analyzed his pragmatic style 
with cynical admiration: 


. . . what does Lord Palmerston then want? He wants to make France feel 
the power of England, by proving to her that the Egyptian affair will 
only finish as he may wish, and without France having any right to take 
a hand. He wants to prove to the two German powers that he does not 
need them, that Russia’s help suffices for England. He wants to keep 
Russia in check and drag her in his train by her permanent anxiety of 
seeing England draw near to France again. 41 


101 



Diplomacy 


It was not an inaccurate description of what Great Britain understood by 
the balance of power. In the end, it enabled Great Britain to traverse the 
century with only one relatively short war with another major power — 
the Crimean War. Although it was far from anyone’s intent when the war 
started, it was, however, precisely the Crimean War which led to the 
collapse of the Metternich order, forged so painstakingly at the Congress 
of Vienna. The disintegration of unity among the three Eastern monarchs 
removed the moral element of moderation from European diplomacy. 
Fifteen years of turmoil followed before a new and much more precari- 
ous stability emerged. 


102 




CHAPTER FIVE 

Two Revolutionaries: 
Napoleon III and Bismarck 

The collapse of the Metternich system in the wake of the Crimean War 
produced nearly two decades of conflict: the war of Piedmont and France 
against Austria of 1859, the war over Schleswig-Holstein of 1864, the 
Austro-Prussian War of 1866, and the Franco-Prussian War of 1870. Out of 
this turmoil, a new balance of power emerged in Europe. France, which 
had participated in three of the wars and encouraged the others, lost its 
position of predominance to Germany. Even more importantly, the moral 
restraints of the Metternich system disappeared. This upheaval became 
symbolized by the use of a new term for unrestrained balance-of-power 
policy: the German word Realpolitik replaced the French term raison 
d'etat without, however, changing its meaning. 

The new European order was the handiwork of two rather unlikely 
collaborators who eventually became arch-adversaries — Emperor Napo- 


0 



Diplomacy 


leon III and Otto von Bismarck. These two men ignored Metternich’s old 
pieties: that in the interest of stability the legitimate crowned heads of the 
states of Europe had to be preserved, that national and liberal movements 
had to be suppressed, and that, above all, relations among states had to 
be determined by consensus among like-minded rulers. They based their 
policy on Realpolitik — the notion that relations among states are deter- 
mined by raw power and that the mighty will prevail. 

The nephew of the great Bonaparte who had ravaged Europe, Napo- 
leon III had been in his youth a member of Italian secret societies fighting 
against Austrian dominance in Italy. Elected President in 1848 , Napoleon, 
as a result of a coup, had himself declared Emperor in 1852 . Otto von 
Bismarck was the scion of an eminent Prussian family and a passionate 
opponent of the liberal Revolution of 1848 in Prussia. Bismarck became 
Ministerprasident (Prime Minister) in 1862 only because the reluctant 
King saw no other recourse to overcome a deadlock with a fractious 
Parliament over military appropriations. 

Between them, Napoleon III and Bismarck managed to overturn the 
Vienna settlement, most significantly the sense of self-restraint which em- 
anated from a shared belief in conservative values. No two more disparate 
personalities than Bismarck and Napoleon III could be imagined. The 
Iron Chancellor and the Sphinx of the Tuileries were united in their 
aversion to the Vienna system. Both felt that the order established by 
Metternich at Vienna in 1815 was an albatross. Napoleon III hated the 
Vienna system because it had been expressly designed to contain France. 
Though Napoleon III did not have the megalomanic ambitions of his 
uncle, this enigmatic leader felt that France was entitled to an occasional 
territorial gain and did not want a united Europe standing in his way. He 
furthermore thought that nationalism and liberalism were values that the 
world identified with France, and that the Vienna system, by repressing 
them, put a rein on his ambitions. Bismarck resented Metternich’s handi- 
work because it locked Prussia into being Austria’s junior partner in the 
German Confederation, and he was convinced that the Confederation 
preserved so many tiny German sovereigns that it shackled Prussia. If 
Prussia were going to realize its destiny and unify Germany, the Vienna 
system had to be destroyed. 

While sharing a mutual disdain for the established order, the two revo- 
lutionaries ended up at diametrically opposite poles in terms of their 
achievements. Napoleon brought about the reverse of what he set out to 
accomplish. Fancying himself the destroyer of the Vienna settlement and 
the inspiration of European nationalism, he threw European diplomacy 
into a state of turmoil from which France gained nothing in the long run 
and other nations benefited. Napoleon made possible the unification of 


104 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


Italy and unintentionally abetted the unification of Germany, two events 
which weakened France geopolitically and destroyed the historical basis 
for the dominant French influence in Central Europe. Thwarting either 
event would have been beyond France’s capabilities, yet Napoleon’s er- 
ratic policy did much to accelerate the process while simultaneously 
dissipating France’s capacity to shape the new international order ac- 
cording to its long-term interests. Napoleon tried to wreck the Vienna 
system because he thought it isolated France — which to some extent was 
true — yet by the time his rule had ended in 1870, France was more 
isolated than it had been during the Metternich period. 

Bismarck’s legacy was quite the opposite. Few statesmen have so al- 
tered the course of history. Before Bismarck took office, German unity 
was expected to occur through the kind of parliamentary, constitutional 
government which had been the thrust of the Revolution of 1848. Five 
years later, Bismarck was well on his way to solving the problem of 
German unification, which had confounded three generations of Ger- 
mans, but he did so on the basis of the pre-eminence of Prussian power, 
not through a process of democratic constitutionalism. Bismarck’s solu- 
tion had never been advocated by any significant constituency. Too 
democratic for conservatives, too authoritarian for liberals, too power- 
oriented for legitimists, the new Germany was tailored to a genius who 
proposed to direct the forces he had unleashed, both foreign and domes- 
tic, by manipulating their antagonisms — a task he mastered but which 
proved beyond the capacity of his successors. 


During his lifetime, Napoleon III was called the “Sphinx of the Tuileries” 
because he was believed to be hatching vast and brilliant designs, the 
nature of which no one could discern until they gradually unfolded. He 
was deemed to be enigmatically clever for having ended France’s diplo- 
matic isolation under the Vienna system and for having triggered the 
disintegration of the Holy Alliance by means of the Crimean War. Only 
one European leader, Otto von Bismarck, saw through him from the 
beginning. In the 1850s, his sardonic description of Napoleon had been-. 
“His intelligence is overrated at the expense of his sentimentality.” 

Like his uncle, Napoleon III was obsessed by his lack of legitimate 
credentials. Though he considered himself a revolutionary, he yearned 
to be accepted by the legitimate kings of Europe. Of course, had the Holy 
Alliance still had its original convictions, it would have tried to overthrow 
the republican institutions which had replaced French royal rule in 1848. 
The bloody excesses of the French Revolution were still within living 
memory but so, too, was the fact that foreign intervention in France had 


105 



Diplomacy 


unleashed French revolutionary armies on the nations of Europe in 1792. 
At the same time, an identical fear of foreign intervention had made 
republican France loath to export her revolution. Out of this stalemate of 
inhibitions, the conservative powers reluctantly brought themselves to 
recognize republican France, which was ruled first by the poet and states- 
man Alphonse de Lamartine, then by Napoleon as elected President, and, 
finally, by Napoleon “III” as Emperor, in 1852, after his coup the previous 
December to overturn the constitutional prohibition against his re-elec- 
tion. 

No sooner had Napoleon III proclaimed the Second Empire than the 
question of recognition arose again. This time it concerned whether to 
recognize Napoleon as Emperor, since the Vienna settlement had spe- 
cifically proscribed the Bonaparte family from the French throne. Austria 
was the first to accept what could not be changed. The Austrian Ambassa- 
dor to Paris, Baron Hubner, reported a characteristically cynical comment 
from his chief, Prince Schwarzenberg, dated December 31, 1851, that 
underlined the end of the Metternich era: “ ‘The days of principles are 
gone.’ ” J 

Napoleon’s next big worry was whether the other monarchs would 
address him with the appellation “brother,” which they used toward each 
other, or some lesser form of address. In the end, the Austrian and 
Prussian monarchs yielded to Napoleon’s preference, though Tsar Nicho- 
las I remained adamant, refusing to go beyond the address of “friend.” 
Given the Tsar’s views of revolutionaries, he no doubt felt he had already 
rewarded Napoleon beyond his due. Hubner recorded the injured feel- 
ings in the Tuileries: 

One has the feeling of being snubbed by the old continental courts. 

This is the worm that eats at the heart of Emperor Napoleon. 2 

Whether these snubs were real or imagined, they revealed the gulf be- 
tween Napoleon and the other European monarchs, which was one of 
the psychological roots of Napoleon’s reckless and relentless assault on 
European diplomacy. 

The irony of Napoleon’s life was that he was much better suited for 
domestic policy, which basically bored him, than he was for foreign 
adventures, for which he lacked both the daring and the insight. When- 
ever he took a breather from his self-appointed revolutionary mission, 
Napoleon made major contributions to France’s development. He 
brought the Industrial Revolution to France. His encouragement of large 
credit institutions played a crucial role in France’s economic develop- 
ment. And he rebuilt Paris into its grandiose modern appearance. In the 


106 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


early nineteenth century, Paris was still a medieval city with narrow, 
winding streets. Napoleon provided his close adviser, Baron Haussmann, 
with the authority and the budget to create the modern city of broad 
boulevards, great public buildings, and sweeping vistas. That one purpose 
of the broad avenues was to provide a clear field of fire to discourage 
revolutions does not detract from the magnificence and the permanence 
of the achievement. 

But foreign policy was Napoleon’s passion, and there he found himself 
torn by conflicting emotions. On the one hand, he realized he would 
never be able to fulfill his quest for legitimacy, because a monarch’s 
legitimacy is a birthright that cannot be conferred. On the other hand, he 
did not really want to go down in history as a legitimist. He had been 
an Italian Carbonari (independence fighter), and considered himself a 
defender of national self-determination. At the same time, he was averse 
to running great risks. Napoleon’s ultimate goal was to abrogate the terri- 
torial clauses of the Vienna settlement and to alter the state system on 
which it had been based. But he never understood that achieving his goal 
would also result in a unified Germany, which would forever end French 
aspirations to dominate Central Europe. 

The erratic nature of his policy was therefore a reflection of his per- 
sonal ambivalence. Distrustful of his “brother” monarchs, Napoleon was 
driven to dependence on public opinion, and his policy fluctuated with 
his assessment of what was needed to sustain his popularity. In 1857, the 
ubiquitous Baron Hubner wrote to the Austrian Emperor: 

In his [Napoleon’s] eyes foreign policy is only an instrument he uses to 
secure his rule in France, to legitimize his throne, to found his dynasty. 

. . . [H]e would not shrink from any means, from any combination which 
suited itself to making him popular at home . 3 

In the process, Napoleon made himself the prisoner of crises he had 
himself engineered, because he lacked the inner compass to keep him 
on course. Time and again, he would encourage a crisis — now in Italy, 
now in Poland, later in Germany — only to recoil before its ultimate con- 
sequences. He possessed his uncle’s ambition but not his nerve, genius, 
or, for that matter, raw power. He supported Italian nationalism as long 
as it was confined to Northern Italy, and advocated Polish independence 
as long as it involved no risk of war. As for Germany, he simply did not 
know on which side to place his bet. Having expected a protracted strug- 
gle between Austria and Prussia, Napoleon made himself ridiculous by 
asking Prussia, the victor, to compensate him after the event for his own 
inability to discern the winner. 


107 



Diplomacy 


What most suited Napoleon’s style was a European Congress to redraw 
the map of Europe, for there he might shine at minimum risk. Nor did 
Napoleon have any clear idea of just how he wanted the borders altered. 
In any event, no other Great Power was willing to arrange such a forum 
to accommodate his domestic needs. No nation agrees to redraw its 
borders — especially to its own disadvantage — unless there is an over- 
whelming necessity to do so. As it turned out, the only Congress at which 
Napoleon presided — the Congress of Paris, which ended the Crimean 
War — did not redraw the map of Europe; it merely ratified what had 
been achieved in the war. Russia was forbidden to maintain a navy in the 
Black Sea and was thus deprived of a defensive capability against another 
British assault. Russia was also forced to return Bessarabia and the terri- 
tory of Kars, on the eastern coast of the Black Sea, to Turkey. Additionally, 
the Tsar was compelled to renounce his claim to be the Protector of the 
Ottoman Christians, which had been the immediate cause of the war. The 
Congress of Paris symbolized the splintering of the Holy Alliance, but no 
participant was prepared to undertake the revision of the map of Europe. 

Napoleon never succeeded in assembling another congress to redraw 
the map of Europe, for one basic reason, which the British ambassador, 
Lord Clarendon, pointed out to him: a country that seeks great changes 
and lacks the willingness to run great risks dooms itself to futility. 

I see that the idea of a European Congress is germinating in the Em- 
peror’s mind, and with it the arrondissement of the French frontier, 
the abolition of obsolete Treaties, and other remaniements as may be 
necessary. I improvised a longish catalogue of dangers and difficulties 
that such a Congress would entail, unless its decisions were unanimous, 
which was not probable, or one or two of the strongest Powers were to 
go to war for what they wanted . 4 

Palmerston once summed up Napoleon’s statesmanship by saying: 

. . ideas proliferated in his head like rabbits in a hutch .” 5 The trouble 
was that these ideas did not relate to any overriding concept. In the 
disarray of the collapsing Metternich system, France had two strategic 
options. It could pursue the policy of Richelieu and strive to keep Central 
Europe divided. This option would have required Napoleon to subordi- 
nate his revolutionary convictions, at least within Germany, in favor of 
the existing legitimate rulers, who were eager to maintain the fragmenta- 
tion of Central Europe. Or Napoleon could have put himself at the head 
of a republican crusade, as his uncle had done, in the expectation that 
France would thereby gain the gratitude of the nationalists and perhaps 
even the political leadership of Europe. 


108 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


Unfortunately for France, Napoleon pursued both strategies simultane- 
ously. An advocate of national self-determination, he seemed oblivious to 
the geopolitical risk this position posed for France in Central Europe. He 
supported the Polish Revolution but recoiled when confronted by its 
consequences. He opposed the Vienna settlement as an affront to France 
without understanding until it was too late that the Vienna world order 
was the best available security guarantee for France as well. 

For the German Confederation was designed to act as a unit only 
against an overwhelming external danger. Its component states were ex- 
plicitly forbidden to join together for offensive purposes, and would 
never have been able to agree on an offensive strategy — as was shown by 
the fact that the subject had never even been broached in the half-century 
of the Confederation’s existence. France’s Rhine frontier, inviolable so 
long as the Vienna settlement was intact, would not prove to be secure 
for a century after the collapse of the Confederation, which Napoleon’s 
policy made possible. 

Napoleon never grasped this key element of French security. As late as 
the outbreak of the Austro-Prussian War in 1866 — the conflict which 
ended the Confederation — he wrote to the Austrian Emperor: 

I must confess that it was not without a certain satisfaction that I wit- 
nessed the dissolution of the German Confederation organized mainly 
against France. 6 

The Habsburg responded far more perceptively: “. . . the German Confed- 
eration, organized with purely defensive motives, had never, during the 
half-century of its existence, given its neighbors cause for alarm.” 7 The 
alternative to the German Confederation was not Richelieu’s fragmented 
Central Europe but a unified Germany with a population exceeding that 
of France and an industrial capacity soon to overshadow it. By attacking 
the Vienna settlement, Napoleon was transforming a defensive obstacle 
into a potential offensive threat to French security. 

A statesman’s test is whether he can discern from the swirl of tactical 
decisions the true long-term interests of his country and devise an appro- 
priate strategy for achieving them. Napoleon could have basked in the 
acclaim given to his clever tactics during the Crimean War (which were 
helped along by Austrian shortsightedness), and in the increased diplo- 
matic options now opening before him. France’s interest would have 
been to stay close to Austria and Great Britain, the two countries most 
likely to sustain the territorial settlement of Central Europe. 

The Emperor’s policy, however, was largely idiosyncratic and driven 


109 



Diplomacy 


by his mercurial nature. As a Bonaparte, he never felt comfortable cooper- 
ating with Austria, whatever raison d’etat might dictate. In 1858, Napoleon 
told a Piedmontese diplomat: “Austria is a cabinet for whom I have always 
felt, and still feel, the most lively repugnance.” 8 His penchant for revolu- 
tionary projects caused him to go to war with Austria over Italy in 1859- 
Napoleon alienated Great Britain by annexing Savoy and Nice in the 
aftermath of the war as well as by his repeated proposals for a European 
Congress to redraw the frontiers of Europe. To complete his isolation, 
Napoleon sacrificed his option of allying France with Russia by supporting 
the Polish Revolution in 1863. Having brought European diplomacy to a 
state of flux under the banner of national self-determination, Napoleon 
now suddenly found himself alone when, out of the turmoil he had done 
so much to cause, a German nation materialized to spell the end of 
French primacy in Europe. 

The Emperor made his first post-Crimea move in Italy in 1859, three 
years after the Congress of Paris. Nobody had expected Napoleon to 
return to the vocation of his youth in seeking to liberate Northern Italy 
from Austrian rule. France would have had little to gain from such an 
adventure. If it succeeded, it would create a state in a much stronger 
position to block the traditional French invasion route; if it failed, the 
humiliation would be compounded by the vagueness of the objective. 
And whether it succeeded or failed, French armies in Italy would disquiet 
Europe. 

For all these reasons, the British Ambassador, Lord Henry Cowley, was 
convinced that a French war in Italy was beyond all probability. “It is not 
in his interests to fight a war,” Hiibner reported Cowley as saying. “The 
alliance with England, although shaken for a moment, and still quite 
dormant, remains the basis of Napoleon Ill’s policy.” 9 Some three de- 
cades later, Hiibner was to offer these reflections: 

We could scarcely comprehend that this man, having reached the pin- 
nacle of honor, unless he was mad, or afflicted with the madness of 
gamblers, seriously could consider, having no understandable motive, 
joining in another adventure . 10 

Yet Napoleon surprised all the diplomats with the exception of his ulti- 
mate nemesis, Bismarck, who had predicted a French war against Austria 
and indeed hoped for it as a means of weakening Austria’s position in 
Germany. 

In July 1858, Napoleon concluded a secret understanding with Camillo 
Benso di Cavour, the Prime Minister of Piedmont (Sardinia), the strongest 

110 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


Italian state, to cooperate in a war against Austria. It was a purely Machia- 
vellian move in which Cavour would unify Northern Italy and Napoleon 
would receive as his reward Nice and Savoy from Piedmont. By May 1859, 
a suitable pretext had been found. Austria, always short of steady nerves, 
permitted itself to be provoked by Piedmontese harassment into declar- 
ing war. Napoleon let it be known that this amounted to a declaration of 
war against France, and launched his armies into Italy. 

Oddly enough, in Napoleon’s time, when Frenchmen talked of the 
consolidation of nation-states as the wave of the future, they thought 
primarily of Italy and not of the much stronger Germany. The French had 
a sympathy and cultural affinity for Italy that was lacking vis-a-vis their 
ominous Eastern neighbor. In addition, the mighty economic boom 
which was to take Germany to the forefront of the European Powers was 
only just beginning; hence it was not yet obvious that Italy would be any 
less powerful than Germany. Prussia’s cautiousness during the Crimean 
War strengthened Napoleon’s view that Prussia was the weakest of the 
Great Powers and incapable of strong action without Russian support. 
Thus, in Napoleon’s mind, an Italian war weakening Austria would reduce 
the power of France’s most dangerous German opponent and enhance 
France’s significance in Italy — an egregious misjudgment on both 
counts. 

Napoleon kept open two contradictory options. In the better case, 
Napoleon could play European statesman: Northern Italy would throw off 
the Austrian yoke, and the European Powers would gather at a congress 
under Napoleon’s sponsorship and agree to the large-scale territorial 
revisions he had failed to achieve at the Congress of Paris. In the worse 
case, the war would reach a stalemate and Napoleon would play the 
Machiavellian manipulator of raison d’etat, gaining some advantage from 
Austria at Piedmont’s expense in return for ending the war. 

Napoleon pursued the two objectives simultaneously. French armies 
were victorious at Magenta and Solferino but unleashed such a tide of 
anti-French sentiment in Germany that, for a time, it appeared as if the 
smaller German states, fearing a new Napoleonic onslaught, would force 
Prussia to intervene on Austria’s side. Jolted by this first sign of German 
nationalism and shaken by his visit to the battlefield at Solferino, Napo- 
leon concluded an armistice with Austria at Villafranca on July 11, 1859, 
without informing his Piedmontese allies. 

Not only had Napoleon failed to achieve either of his objectives, he had 
seriously weakened his country’s position in the international arena. 
Henceforth, the Italian nationalists would carry the principles he had 
espoused to lengths he had never envisioned. Napoleon’s goal of estab- 


111 



Diplomacy 


lishing a medium-sized satellite in an Italy divided into perhaps five states 
annoyed Piedmont, which was not about to abandon its national vocation. 
Austria remained as adamant about holding on to Venetia as Napoleon 
was about returning it to Italy, creating yet another insoluble dispute 
involving no conceivable French interest. Great Britain interpreted the 
annexation of Savoy and Nice as the beginning of another period of 
Napoleonic conquests and refused all French initiatives for Napoleon’s 
favorite obsession of holding a European congress. And all the while, 
German nationalists saw in Europe’s turmoil a window of opportunity to 
advance their own hopes for national unity. 

Napoleon’s conduct during the Polish revolt of 1863 advanced his jour- 
ney into isolation. Reviving the Bonaparte tradition of friendship with 
Poland, Napoleon first tried to convince Russia to make some concessions 
to its rebellious subjects. But the Tsar would not even discuss such a 
proposal. Next, Napoleon tried to organize a joint effort with Great Brit- 
ain, but Palmerston was too wary of the mercurial French Emperor. Fi- 
nally, Napoleon turned to Austria with the proposition that it give up its 
own Polish provinces to a not-yet-created Polish state and Venetia to Italy, 
while seeking compensation in Silesia and the Balkans. The idea held no 
obvious appeal for Austria, which was being asked to risk war with Prussia 
and Russia for the privilege of seeing a French satellite emerge on its 
borders. 

Frivolity is a costly indulgence for a statesman, and its price must 
eventually be paid. Actions geared to the mood of the moment and unre- 
lated to any overall strategy cannot be sustained indefinitely. Under Napo- 
leon, France lost influence over the internal arrangements of Germany, 
which had been the mainstay of French policy since Richelieu. Whereas 
Richelieu had understood that a weak Central Europe was the key to 
French security, Napoleon’s policy, driven by his quest for publicity, con- 
centrated on the periphery of Europe, the only place where gains could 
be made at minimum risk. With the center of gravity of European policy 
moving toward Germany, France found itself alone. 

An ominous event occurred in 1864. For the first time since the Con- 
gress of Vienna, Austria and Prussia jointly disrupted the tranquillity of 
Central Europe, starting a war on behalf of a German cause against a non- 
German power. The issue at hand was the future of the Elbe duchies of 
Schleswig and Holstein, which were dynastically linked to the Danish 
crown but were also members of the German Confederation. The death 
of the Danish ruler had produced such a complex tangle of political, 
dynastic, and national issues that Palmerston was prompted to quip that 
only three people had ever understood it: of these, one was dead, the 


112 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


second was in a lunatic asylum, and he himself was the third but he had 
forgotten it. 

The substance of the dispute was far less important than the coalition 
of two key German states waging war on tiny Denmark in order to force 
it to relinquish two ancient German territories linked with the Danish 
crown. It proved that Germany was capable of offensive action after all 
and that, should Confederation machinery turn out to be too cumber- 
some, the two German superpowers might simply ignore it. 

According to the traditions of the Vienna system, at this point the Great 
Powers should have assembled in Congress to restore an approximation 
of the status quo ante. Yet Europe was now in disarray largely due to the 
actions of the French Emperor. Russia was not prepared to antagonize 
the two countries which had stood aside while it quelled the Polish revolt. 
Great Britain was uneasy about the attack on Denmark but would need a 
Continental ally to intervene, and France, its only feasible partner, in- 
spired little confidence. 

History, ideology, and raison d'etat should have warned Napoleon that 
events would soon develop a momentum of their own. Yet he wavered 
between upholding the principles of traditional French foreign policy, 
which was designed to keep Germany divided, and supporting the princi- 
ple of nationality, which had been the inspiration of his youth. French 
Foreign Minister Drouyn de Lhuys wrote to La Tour d’Auvergne, the 
French Ambassador to London: 

Placed between the rights of a country for which we have long sympa- 
thized, and the aspirations of the German population, which we equally 
have to take into account, we have to act with a greater degree of 
circumspection than does England . 11 

The responsibility of statesmen, however, is to resolve complexity rather 
than to contemplate it. For leaders unable to choose among their alterna- 
tives, circumspection becomes an alibi for inaction. Napoleon had be- 
come convinced of the wisdom of inaction, enabling Prussia and Austria 
to settle the future of the Elbe duchies. They detached Schleswig-Holstein 
from Denmark and occupied them jointly while the rest of Europe stood 
by — a solution which would have been unthinkable under the Metternich 
system. France’s nightmare of German unity was approaching, something 
Napoleon had been dodging for a decade. 

Bismarck was not about to share the leadership of Germany. He turned 
the joint war for Schleswig-Holstein into another of Austria’s seemingly 
endless series of blunders, which for a decade marked the progressive 


113 



Diplomacy 


erosion of its position as a Great Power. The reason these errors occurred 
was always the same — Austria’s appeasing a self-proclaimed opponent by 
offering to cooperate with it. The strategy of appeasement worked no 
better with Prussia than it had a decade earlier, during the Crimean War, 
vis-a-vis France. Far from buying Austria’s release from Prussian pres- 
sures, the joint victory over Denmark provided a new and highly disad- 
vantageous forum for harassment. Austria was now left to administer the 
Elbe duchies with a Prussian ally whose Prime Minister, Bismarck, was 
determined to use the opportunity to bring about a long-desired show- 
down in a territory hundreds of miles from Austrian soil and adjoining 
Prussia’s principal possessions. 

As the tension mounted, Napoleon’s ambivalence came into sharper 
focus. He dreaded German unification but was sympathetic to German 
nationalism and dithered about solving that insoluble dilemma. He con- 
sidered Prussia the most genuinely national German state, writing in I860 
that: 

Prussia personifies the German nationality, religious reform, commer- 
cial progress, liberal constitutionalism. It is the largest of the truly 
German monarchies; it has more freedom of conscience, more enlight- 
enment, grants more political rights, than most other German states . 12 

Bismarck would have subscribed to every word. However, for Bismarck, 
Napoleon’s affirmation of Prussia’s unique position was the key to Prus- 
sia’s eventual triumph. In the end, Napoleon’s avowed admiration for 
Prussia amounted to one more alibi for doing nothing. Rationalizing 
indecision as so much clever maneuvering, Napoleon in fact encouraged 
an Austro-Prussian war, partly because he was convinced that Prussia 
would lose. He told Alexandre Walewski, his erstwhile Foreign Minister, 
in December 1865: “Believe me dear friend, war between Austria and 
Prussia constitutes one of those unhoped-for eventualities which can 
bring us more than one advantage.” 13 Curiously, in the course of Napo- 
leon’s encouragement of the drift toward war, he never seemed to have 
asked himself why Bismarck was so determined on war if Prussia was so 
likely to be defeated. 

Four months before the Austro-Prussian War started, Napoleon went 
beyond the tacit to the explicit. In effect urging war, he told the Prussian 
Ambassador to Paris, Count von der Goltz, in February 1866: 

I ask you to tell the King [of Prussia] that he can always count on my 
amity. In case of a conflict between Prussia and Austria, I will maintain 

114 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


the most absolute neutrality. I desire the reunion of the Duchies 
[Schleswig-Holstein] with Prussia Should the struggle take on di- 

mensions that one can’t yet foresee, I am convinced that I could always 
reach an understanding with Prussia, whose interests in a great number 
of questions are identical with those of France, while I see no turf on 
which I could agree with Austria . 14 

What did Napoleon really want? Was he convinced of the likelihood of a 
stalemate that would enhance his bargaining position? He was clearly 
hoping for some Prussian concessions in exchange for his neutrality. 
Bismarck understood this game. If Napoleon remained neutral, he of- 
fered to take a benevolent attitude to French seizure of Belgium, which 
would have had the additional benefit of embroiling France with Great 
Britain. Napoleon probably did not take this offer too seriously since he 
expected Prussia to lose; his moves were designed more to keep Prussia 
on its course to war than to bargain for benefits. Some years later, Count 
Armand, the French Foreign Minister’s top assistant, admitted: 

The only worry that we had at the Foreign Office was that Prussia 
would be crushed and humiliated to too great an extent, and we were 
determined to prevent this through timely intervention. The Emperor 
wanted to let Prussia be defeated, then to intervene and to construct 
Germany according to his fantasies . 15 

What Napoleon had in mind was an updating of Richelieu’s machinations. 
Prussia was expected to offer France compensation in the West for extri- 
cation from its defeat, Venetia would be given to Italy, and a new German 
arrangement would result in the creation of a North German Confedera- 
tion under Prussian auspices and a South German grouping supported 
by France and Austria. The only thing wrong with this scheme was that, 
whereas the Cardinal knew how to judge the relation of forces and 
was willing to fight for his judgments, Napoleon was prepared to do 
neither. 

Napoleon procrastinated, hoping for a turn of events that would pre- 
sent him with his deepest desires at no risk. The device he used was his 
standard ploy of calling for a European congress to avert the threat of 
war. The reaction by now was equally standard. The other powers, fearful 
of Napoleon’s designs, refused to attend. Wherever he turned, his di- 
lemma awaited him: he could defend the status quo by abandoning his 
support of the nationality principle; or he could encourage revisionism 
and nationalism and in the process jeopardize the national interests of 


115 



Diplomacy 


France as they had been historically conceived. Napoleon sought refuge 
in hinting to Prussia about “compensations” without specifying what they 
were, which convinced Bismarck that French neutrality was a question of 
price, not principle. Goltz wrote to Bismarck: 

The only difficulty that the Emperor finds in a common stand of Prussia, 
France and Italy in a congress is the lack of a compensation to be 
offered to France. One knows what we want; one knows what Italy 
wants; but the Emperor can’t say what France wants, and we can’t offer 
him any suggestion in this regard. 16 

Great Britain made its attendance at the Congress dependent on a prior 
French agreement to the status quo . Instead of seizing upon this conse- 
cration of the German arrangements which owed so much to French 
leadership and to which France owed its security, Napoleon backed off, 
insisting that, “to maintain the peace, it is necessary to take into account 
the national passions and requirements.” 17 In short, Napoleon was willing 
to risk an Austro-Prussian war and a unified Germany in order to gain 
vague spoils in Italy, which affected no real French national interests, and 
for gains in Western Europe, which he was reluctant to specify. But in 
Bismarck he was up against a master who insisted on the power of reali- 
ties, and who exploited for his own ends the cosmetic maneuvers at 
which Napoleon excelled. 

There were French leaders who understood the risks Napoleon was 
running, and who realized that the so-called compensation he was aiming 
for involved no basic French interest. In a brilliant speech on May 3, 1866, 
Adolphe Thiers, a staunch republican opponent of Napoleon and later 
President of France, predicted correctly that Prussia was likely to emerge 
as the dominant force in Germany: 

One will see a return of the Empire of Charles V, which formerly 
resided in Vienna, and now will reside in Berlin which will be close to 
our border, and will apply pressure to it — You have a right to resist 
this policy in the name of the interest of France, for France is too 
important for such a revolution not to menace her gravely. And when 
she had struggled for two centuries ... to destroy this colossus, is she 
prepared to watch as it re-establishes itself before her eyes?! 18 

Thiers argued that, in place of Napoleon’s vague musings, France should 
adopt a clear policy of opposition to Prussia and invoke as a pretext the 
defense of the independence of the German states — the old Richelieu 


116 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


formula. France, he claimed, had the right to resist German unification 
“first in the name of the independence of the German states . . . second, 
in the name of her own independence, and, finally in the name of the 
European balance, which is the interest of all, the interest of universal 
society Today one tries to heap ridicule on the term ‘European bal- 

ance’ . . . but, what is the European balance? It is the independence of 
Europe.” 19 

It was nearly too late to head off the war between Prussia and Austria 
that would irrevocably alter the European balance. Analytically, Thiers 
was correct but the premises for such a policy ought to have been estab- 
lished a decade earlier. Even now, Bismarck might have been brought up 
short if France had issued a strong warning that it would not permit 
Austria to be defeated or traditional principalities like the Kingdom of 
Hanover to be destroyed. But Napoleon rejected such a course because 
he expected Austria to win, and because he seemed to prize undoing the 
Vienna settlement and fulfilling the Bonaparte tradition above any analysis 
of historic French national interests. He replied to Thiers three days later: 
“I detest those treaties of 1815 which nowadays people want to make the 
sole basis of our policy.” 20 

Little more than a month after Thiers’s speech, Prussia and Austria were 
at war. Against all Napoleon’s expectations, Prussia won decisively and 
quickly. By the rules of Richelieu’s diplomacy, Napoleon should have 
assisted the loser and prevented a clear-cut Prussian victory. But, though 
he moved an army corps of “observation” to the Rhine, he dithered. 
Bismarck threw Napoleon the sop of letting him mediate the peace, 
though this empty gesture could not obscure France’s growing irrele- 
vance to German arrangements. At the Treaty of Prague of August 1866, 
Austria was forced to withdraw from Germany. Two states, Hanover and 
Hesse-Cassel, which had sided with Austria during the war, were annexed 
by Prussia along with Schleswig-Holstein and the free city of Frankfurt. 
By deposing their rulers, Bismarck made it clear that Prussia, once a 
linchpin of the Holy Alliance, had abandoned legitimacy as the guiding 
principle of the international order. 

The North German states which retained their independence were 
incorporated into Bismarck’s new creation, the North German Confedera- 
tion, subject to Prussian leadership in everything from trade legislation to 
foreign policy. The South German states of Bavaria, Baden, and Wurttem- 
berg were allowed to retain their independence at the price of treaties 
with Prussia that brought their armies under Prussian military leadership 
in the event of a war with an outside power. The unification of Germany 
was now just one crisis away. 


117 



Diplomacy 


Napoleon had maneuvered his country into a dead end from which 
extrication proved impossible. Too late, he tried for an alliance with 
Austria, which he had expelled from Italy by military action and from 
Germany by neutrality. But Austria had lost interest in recovering either 
position, preferring to concentrate first on rebuilding its empire as a dual 
monarchy based in Vienna and Budapest, and then on its possessions in 
the Balkans. Great Britain was put off by France’s designs on Luxembourg 
and Belgium; and Russia never forgave Napoleon his conduct over Po- 
land. 

France was now obliged to tend to the collapse of its historic European 
pre-eminence all by itself. The more hopeless its position, the more 
Napoleon sought to recoup it by some brilliant move, like a gambler who 
doubles his bet after each loss. Bismarck had encouraged Napoleon’s 
neutrality in the Austro-Prussian War by dangling before him the prospect 
of territorial acquisitions — first in Belgium, then in Luxembourg. These 
prospects vanished whenever Napoleon tried to snatch them because 
Napoleon wanted his “compensation” handed to him, and because Bis- 
marck saw no reason to run risks when he had already harvested the 
fruits of Napoleon’s indecisiveness. 

Humiliated by these demonstrations of impotence, and above all by 
the increasingly obvious tilt of the European balance against France, Na- 
poleon sought to compensate for his miscalculation that Austria would 
win the Austro-Prussian War by making an issue of the succession to the 
Spanish throne, which had become vacant. He demanded an assurance 
from the Prussian King that no Hohenzollern prince (the Prussian dy- 
nasty) would seek the throne. It was another empty gesture capable of 
producing at best a prestige success without any relevance to the power 
relationships in Central Europe. 

Nobody ever outmaneuvered Bismarck in a fluid diplomacy. In one of 
his craftier moves, Bismarck used Napoleon s posturing to lure him into 
declaring war on Prussia in 1870. The French demand that the Prussian 
King renounce any member of his family ever seeking the Spanish crown 
was indeed provocative. But the stately old King William, rather than 
losing his temper, patiently and correctly refused the French ambassador 
sent to secure the pledge. The King sent his account of the affair to 
Bismarck, who edited his telegram — taking out any language conveying 
the patience and propriety with which the King had in fact treated the 
French ambassador. 21 Bismarck, well ahead of his time, then resorted to 
a technique which subsequent statesmen developed into an art form: he 
leaked the so-called Ems Dispatch to the press. The edited version of the 
King’s telegram looked like a royal snub of France. Outraged, the French 
public demanded war, which Napoleon gave them. 


118 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


Prussia won quickly and decisively with the assistance of all the other 
German states. The road now lay clear for completing the unification of 
Germany, proclaimed rather tactlessly by the Prussian leadership on Janu- 
ary 18, 1871, in the Hall of Mirrors of Versailles. 

Napoleon had wrought the revolution which he had sought, though its 
consequences were quite the opposite of what he had intended. The 
map of Europe had indeed been redrawn, but the new arrangement had 
irreparably weakened France’s influence without bringing Napoleon the 
renown he craved. 

Napoleon had encouraged revolution without understanding its likely 
outcome. Unable to assess the relationship of forces and to enlist it in 
fulfilling his long-term goals. Napoleon failed this test. His foreign policy 
collapsed not because he lacked ideas but because he was unable to 
establish any order among his multitude of aspirations or any relationship 
between them and the reality emerging all around him. Questing for 
publicity, Napoleon never had a single line of policy to guide him. In- 
stead, he was driven by a web of objectives, some of them quite contradic- 
tory. When he confronted the crucial crisis of his career, the various 
impulses canceled each other out. 

Napoleon saw the Metternich system as humiliating to France and as a 
constraint upon its ambitions. He was successful in disrupting the Holy 
Alliance by driving a wedge between Austria and Russia during the Cri- 
mean War. But he did not know what to do with his triumph. From 1853 
to 1871 relative chaos prevailed as the European order was reorganized. 
When this period ended, Germany emerged as the strongest power on 
the Continent. Legitimacy — the principle of the unity of conservative rul- 
ers that had mitigated the harshness of the balance-of-power system dur- 
ing the Metternich years — turned into an empty slogan. Napoleon himself 
had contributed to all these developments. Overestimating France’s 
strength, he had encouraged every upheaval, convinced that he could 
turn it to France’s benefit. 

In the end, international politics came to be based on raw power. And 
in such a world, there was an inherent gap between France’s image of 
itself as the dominant nation of Europe and its capacity to live up to it — 
a gap that has blighted French policy to this day. During Napoleon’s reign, 
this was evidenced by the Emperor’s inability to implement his endless 
proposals for holding a European congress to revise the map of Europe. 
Napoleon called for a congress after the Crimean War in 1856, before the 
Italian War in 1859, during the Polish revolt in 1863, during the Danish 
War in 1864, and before the Austro-Prussian War in 1866 — always seeking 
to gain at the conference table the revision of frontiers which he never 
precisely defined and for which he was not prepared to run the risk of 


119 



Diplomacy 


war. Napoleon’s problem was that he was not strong enough to insist, 
and that his schemes were too radical to command consensus. 

France’s penchant for associating with countries ready to accept its 
leadership has been a constant factor in French foreign policy since the 
Crimean War. Unable to dominate an alliance with Great Britain, Ger- 
many, Russia, or the United States, and considering junior status incom- 
patible with its notions of national grandeur and its messianic role in the 
world, France has sought leadership in pacts with lesser powers — with 
Sardinia, Romania, and the middle German states in the nineteenth cen- 
tury, with Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania in the interwar pe- 
riod. 

The same attitude could be found in post-de Gaulle French foreign 
policy. A century after the Franco-Prussian War, the problem of a more 
powerful Germany remained France’s nightmare. France made the coura- 
geous choice of seeking friendship with its feared and admired neighbor. 
Nevertheless, geopolitical logic would have suggested that France seek 
close ties with the United States — if only to increase its options. French 
pride, however, prevented this from happening, leading France to search, 
sometimes quixotically, for a grouping — occasionally almost any group- 
ing — to balance the United States with a European consortium, even at 
the price of eventual German pre-eminence. In the modern period, 
France acted at times as a kind of parliamentary opposition to American 
leadership, trying to build the European Community into an alternative 
world leader and cultivating ties with nations it could dominate, or 
thought it could dominate. 

Since the end of Napoleon Ill’s reign, France has lacked the power to 
impose the universalist aspirations it inherited from the French Revolu- 
tion, or the arena to find an adequate outlet for its missionary zeal. For 
over a century, France has been finding it difficult to accept the fact that 
the objective conditions for the pre-eminence Richelieu had brought it 
disappeared once national consolidation had been achieved in Europe. 
Much of the prickly style of its diplomacy has been due to attempts by its 
leaders to perpetuate its role as the center of European policy in an 
environment increasingly uncongenial to such aspirations. It is ironic that 
the country that invented raison d'etat should have had to occupy itself, 
for the better part of a century, with trying to bring its aspirations in line 
with its capabilities. 


The destruction of the Vienna system, which Napoleon had begun, was 
completed by Bismarck. Bismarck achieved political prominence as the 
archconservative opponent of the liberal Revolution of 1848. He was also 


120 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


the first leader to introduce universal male suffrage to Europe, along with 
the most comprehensive system of social welfare the world would see 
for sixty years. In 1848, Bismarck strenuously fought the elected Parlia- 
ment’s offer of the German imperial crown to the Prussian King. But a 
little more than two decades later, he himself would hand that imperial 
crown to a Prussian king at the end of the process of unifying the German 
nation on the basis of opposition to liberal principles, and of Prussia’s 
capacity to impose its will by force. This astonishing achievement caused 
the international order to revert to the unrestrained contests of the eigh- 
teenth century, now made all the more dangerous by industrial technol- 
ogy and the capacity to mobilize vast national resources. No longer was 
there talk of the unity of crowned heads or of harmony among the ancient 
states of Europe. Under Bismarck’s Realpolitik, foreign policy became a 
contest of strength. 

Bismarck’s accomplishments were as unexpected as his personality. 
The man of “blood and iron” wrote prose of extraordinary simplicity and 
beauty, loved poetry, and copied pages of Byron in his diary. The states- 
man who extolled Realpolitik possessed an extraordinary sense of pro- 
portion which turned power into an instrument of self-restraint. 

What is a revolutionary? If the answer to that question were without 
ambiguity, few revolutionaries would ever succeed. For revolutionaries 
almost always start from a position of inferior strength. They prevail 
because the established order is unable to grasp its own vulnerability. 
This is especially true when the revolutionary challenge emerges not with 
a march on the Bastille but in conservative garb. Few institutions have 
defenses against those who evoke the expectation that they will preserve 
them. 

So it was with Otto von Bismarck. His life began during the flowering 
of the Metternich system, in a world consisting of three major elements: 
the European balance of power; an internal German equilibrium between 
Austria and Prussia; and a system of alliances based on the unity of conser- 
vative values. For a generation after the Vienna settlement, international 
tensions remained low because all the major states perceived a stake in 
their mutual survival, and because the so-called Eastern Courts of Prussia, 
Austria, and Russia were committed to each other’s values. 

Bismarck challenged each of these premises. 22 He was convinced that 
Prussia had become the strongest German state and did not need the 
Holy Alliance as a link to Russia. In his view, shared national interests 
would supply an adequate bond, and Prussian Realpolitik could substitute 
for conservative unity. Bismarck considered Austria an obstacle to Prus- 
sia’s German mission, not a partner in it. Contrary to the views of nearly 
all his contemporaries, except perhaps the Piedmontese Prime Minister 


121 



Diplomacy 


Cavour, Bismarck treated Napoleon’s restless diplomacy as a strategic 
opportunity rather than as a threat. 

When Bismarck delivered a speech in 1850 attacking the conventional 
wisdom that German unity required the establishment of parliamentary 
institutions, his conservative supporters at first did not realize that what 
they were hearing was above all a challenge to the conservative premises 
of the Metternich system. 

Prussia’s honor does not consist in our playing all over Germany the 
Don Quixote for vexed parliamentary celebrities, who consider their 
local constitution threatened. I seek Prussia’s honor in keeping Prussia 
apart from any disgraceful connection with democracy and never ad- 
mitting that anything occur in Germany without Prussia’s permis- 
sion 23 

On the surface, Bismarck’s attack on liberalism was an application of the 
Metternich philosophy. Yet it contained a decisive difference in emphasis. 
The Metternich system had been based on the premise that Prussia and 
Austria shared a commitment to conservative institutions and needed 
each other to defeat liberal democratic trends. Bismarck was implying 
that Prussia could impose its preferences unilaterally; that Prussia could 
be conservative at home without tying itself to Austria or any other conser- 
vative state in foreign policy; and that it needed no alliances to cope with 
domestic upheaval. In Bismarck, the Habsburgs faced the same challenge 
with which Richelieu had presented them — a policy divorced from any 
value system except the glory of the state. And, just as with Richelieu, they 
did not know how to deal with it or even how to comprehend its nature. 

But how was Prussia to sustain Realpolitik all alone in the center of the 
Continent? Since 1815, Prussia’s answer had been adherence to the Holy 
Alliance at almost any price; Bismarck’s answer was the exact opposite — 
to forge alliances and relationships in all directions, so that Prussia would 
always be closer to each of the contending parties than they were to one 
another. In this manner, a position of seeming isolation would enable 
Prussia to manipulate the commitments of the other powers and to sell 
its support to the highest bidder. 

In Bismarck’s view, Prussia would be in a strong position to implement 
such a policy, because it had few foreign-policy interests other than en- 
hancing its own position within Germany. Every other power had more 
complicated involvements: Great Britain had not only its empire but the 
overall balance of power to worry about; Russia was simultaneously press- 
ing into Eastern Europe, Asia, and the Ottoman Empire; France had a 
newfound empire, ambitions in Italy, and an adventure in Mexico on its 


122 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


hands; and Austria was preoccupied with Italy and the Balkans, and with 
its leadership role in the German Confederation. Because Prussia’s policy 
was so focused on Germany, it really had no major disagreements with 
any other power except Austria, and at that point the disagreement with 
Austria was primarily in Bismarck’s own mind. Nonalignment, to use a 
modern term, was the functional equivalent of Bismarck’s policy of selling 
Prussia’s cooperation in what he perceived to be a seller’s market: 

The present situation forces us not to commit ourselves in advance of 
the other powers. We are not able to shape the relations of the Great 
Powers to each other as we wish, but we can maintain freedom of 
action to utilize to our advantage those relationships which do come 
about. . . . Our relations to Austria, Britain and Russia do not furnish an 
obstacle to a rapprochement with any of these powers. Only our rela- 
tions with France require careful attention so that we keep open the 
option of going with France as easily as with the other powers 24 

This hint of rapprochement with Bonaparte France implied a readiness 
to throw ideology to the wind — in order to free Prussia to ally itself with 
any country (whatever its domestic institutions) that could advance its 
interests. Bismarck’s policy marked a return to the principles of Richelieu, 
who, though a Cardinal of the Church, had opposed the Catholic Holy 
Roman Emperor when it was required by the interests of France. Simi- 
larly, Bismarck, though conservative by personal conviction, parted com- 
pany with his conservative mentors whenever it seemed that their 
legitimist principles would constrain Prussia’s freedom of action. 

This implicit disagreement came to a head when, in 1856, Bismarck, 
then Prussian ambassador to the German Confederation, amplified his 
view that Prussia be more forthcoming toward Napoleon III, who, in the 
eyes of Prussia’s conservatives, was a usurper of the legitimate king’s 
prerogatives. 

Putting Napoleon forward as a potential Prussian interlocutor went 
beyond what Bismarck’s conservative constituency, which had launched 
and fostered his diplomatic career, could tolerate. It greeted Bismarck’s 
emerging philosophy with the same outraged disbelief among his erst- 
while supporters that Richelieu had encountered two centuries earlier 
when he had advanced the then revolutionary thesis that raison d'etat 
should have precedence over religion, and the same which would in our 
time greet Richard Nixon’s policy of detente with the Soviet Union. To 
conservatives, Napoleon III spelled the threat of a new round of French 
expansionism and, even more importantly, symbolized a reaffirmation of 
the hated principles of the French Revolution. 


123 



Diplomacy 


Bismarck did not dispute the conservative analysis of Napoleon any 
more than Nixon challenged the conservative interpretation of commu- 
nist motives. Bismarck saw in the restless French ruler, as Nixon did in 
the decrepit Soviet leadership (see chapter 28), both an opportunity and 
a danger. He considered Prussia less vulnerable than Austria to either 
French expansionism or revolution. Nor did Bismarck accept the prevail- 
ing opinion of Napoleons cunning, noting sarcastically that the ability to 
admire others was not his most highly developed trait. The more Austria 
feared Napoleon, the more it would have to make concessions to Prussia, 
and the greater would become Prussia’s diplomatic flexibility. 

The reasons for Bismarck’s break with the Prussian conservatives were 
much the same as those for Richelieu’s debate with his clerical critics, the 
chief difference being that the Prussian conservatives insisted on univer- 
sal political principles, rather than universal religious principles. Bis- 
marck asserted that power supplied its own legitimacy; the conservatives 
argued that legitimacy represented a value beyond calculations of power. 
Bismarck believed that a correct evaluation of power implied a doctrine 
of self-limitation; the conservatives insisted that only moral principles 
could ultimately limit the claims of power. 

The conflict evoked a poignant exchange of letters in the late 1850s 
between Bismarck and his old mentor, Leopold von Gerlach, the Prussian 
King s military adjutant, to whom Bismarck owed everything — his first 
diplomatic appointment, his access to the court, his entire career. 

The exchange of letters between the two men began when Bismarck 
sent Gerlach a recommendation that Prussia develop a diplomatic option 
toward France along with a covering letter in which he placed utility 
above ideology: 

I cannot escape the mathematical logic of the fact that present-day 
Austria cannot be our friend. As long as Austria does not agree to a 
delimitation of spheres of influence in Germany, we must anticipate a 
contest with it, by means of diplomacy and lies in peace time, with the 
utilization of every opportunity to give a coup de graced 

Gerlach, however, could not bring himself to accept the proposition that 
strategic advantage could justify abandoning principle, especially when it 
involved a Bonaparte. He urged the Metternich remedy — that Prussia 
bring Austria and Russia closer together and restore the Holy Alliance to 
enforce the isolation of France. 26 

What Gerlach found even more incomprehensible was another Bis- 
marck proposal to the effect that Napoleon be invited to the maneuvers 


124 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


of a Prussian army corps because “this proof of good relations with 
France . . . would increase our influence in all diplomatic relations .” 27 

The suggestion that a Bonaparte participate in Prussian maneuvers pro- 
voked a veritable outburst from Gerlach: “How can a man of your intelli- 
gence sacrifice his principles to such an individual as Napoleon. Napoleon 
is our natural enemy .” 28 Had Gerlach seen Bismarck’s cynical marginalia 
— “What of it?” — he might have saved himself the next letter, in which 
he reiterated his antirevolutionary principles of a lifetime, the same that 
had led him to support the Holy Alliance and to sponsor Bismarck’s early 
career: 

My political principle is and remains the war against revolution. You 
will not convince Bonaparte that he is not on the revolutionary side. 
And he will not stand on any other side because he clearly derives 
advantage from this. ... So if my principle of opposing revolution is 
right ... it also has to be adhered to in practice . 29 

Yet Bismarck disagreed with Gerlach not because he did not understand 
him, as Gerlach supposed, but because he understood him only too well. 
Realpolitik for Bismarck depended on flexibility and on the ability to 
exploit every available option without the constraint of ideology. Just as 
Richelieu’s defenders had done, Bismarck transferred the debate to the 
one principle he and Gerlach did share, and one that would leave Gerlach 
at a distinct disadvantage — the overriding importance of Prussian patrio- 
tism. Gerlach’s insistence on the unity of conservative interests was, ac- 
cording to Bismarck, incompatible with loyalty to their country: 

France interests me only insofar as it affects the situation of my country 

and we can make policy only with the France which exists As a 

romantic I can shed a tear for the fate of Henry V (the Bourbon pre- 
tender); as a diplomat I would be his servant if I were French, but as 
things stand, France, irrespective of the accident who leads it, is for me 
an unavoidable pawn on the chessboard of diplomacy, where I have no 
other duty than to serve my king and my country [Bismarck’s emphasis], 

I cannot reconcile personal sympathies and antipathies toward foreign 
powers with my sense of duty in foreign affairs; indeed I see in them 
the embryo of disloyalty toward the Sovereign and the country I serve . 30 

How was a traditional Prussian to respond to the proposition that Prussian 
patriotism transcended the principle of legitimacy and that, if circum- 
stances should require it, a generation’s faith in the unity of conservative 
values could verge on disloyalty? Bismarck implacably cut off every intel- 


125 



Diplomacy 


lectual escape route, rejecting in advance Gerlach’s argument that legiti- 
macy was Prussia’s national interest and that therefore Napoleon was 
Prussia’s permanent enemy: 

... I could deny this — but even if you were right I would not consider 
it politically wise to let other states know of our fears in peace time. 
Until the break you predict occurs I would think it useful to encourage 
the belief . . . that the tension with France is not an organic fault of our 
nature — 31 

In other words, Realpolitik demanded tactical flexibility, and the Prussian 
national interest required keeping open the option of making a deal with 
France. The bargaining position of a country 7 depends on the options it is 
perceived to have. Closing them off eases the adversary’s calculations, 
and constricts those of the practitioners of Realpolitik. 

The break between Gerlach and Bismarck became irrevocable in 1860 
over the issue of Prussia’s attitude toward France’s war with Austria over 
Italy. To Gerlach, the war had eliminated all doubt that Napoleon’s true 
purpose was to set the stage for aggression in the style of the first Bona- 
parte. Gerlach therefore urged Prussia to support Austria. Bismarck saw 
instead the opportunity — that if Austria were forced to retreat from Italy, 
it could serve as the precursor of its eventual expulsion from Germany 
as well. To Bismarck, the convictions of the generation of Metternich had 
turned into a dangerous set of inhibitions: 

I stand or fall with my own Sovereign, even if in my opinion he ruins 
himself stupidly, but for me France will remain France, whether it is 
governed by Napoleon or by St. Louis and Austria is for me a foreign 

country I know that you will reply that fact and right cannot be 

separated, that a properly conceived Prussian policy requires chastity 
in foreign affairs even from the point of view of utility. I am prepared 
to discuss the point of utility with you; but if you pose antinomies 
between right and revolution; Christianity and infidelity; God and the 
devil; I can argue no longer and can merely say, “I am not of your 
opinion and you judge in me what is not yours to judge.” 32 

This bitter declaration of faith was the functional equivalent of Richelieu’s 
assertion that, since the soul is immortal, man must submit to the judg- 
ment of God but that states, being mortal, can only be judged by what 
works. Like Richelieu, Bismarck did not reject Gerlach’s moral views as 
personal articles of faith — he probably shared most of them; but he de- 


126 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


nied their relevance to the duties of statesmanship by way of elaborating 
the distinction between personal belief and Realpolitik: 

I did not seek the service of the King The God who unexpectedly 

placed me into it will probably rather show me the way out than let my 
soul perish. I would overestimate the value of this life strangely . . . 
should I not be convinced that after thirty years it will be irrelevant to 
me what political successes I or my country have achieved in Europe. I 
can even think out the idea that some day “unbelieving Jesuits” will 
rule over the Mark Brandenburg [core of Prussia] together with a Bona- 
partist absolutism. ... I am a child of different times than you, but as 
honest a one of mine as you of yours . 33 


This eerie premonition of Prussia’s fate a century later never received an 
answer from the man to whom Bismarck owed his career. 

Bismarck was indeed the child of a different era from that of his erst- 
while mentor. Bismarck belonged to the age of Realpolitik; Gerlach had 
been shaped by the period of Metternich. The Metternich system had 
reflected the eighteenth-century 7 conception of the universe as a great 
clockwork of intricately meshing parts in which disruption of one part 
meant upsetting the interaction of the others. Bismarck represented the 
new age in both science and politics. He perceived the universe not as a 
mechanical balance, but in its modern version — as consisting of particles 
in flux whose impact on each other creates what is perceived as reality. 
Its kindred biological philosophy was Darwin’s theory of evolution based 
on the survival of the fittest. 

Driven by such convictions, Bismarck proclaimed the relativity of all 
belief, including even the belief in the permanence of his own country. 
In the world of Realpolitik , it was the statesman’s duty to evaluate ideas 
as forces in relation to all the other forces relevant to making a decision; 
and the various elements needed to be judged by how well they could 
serve the national interest, not by preconceived ideologies. 

Still, however hard-boiled Bismarck’s philosophy might have appeared, 
it was built on an article of faith as unprovable as Gerlach’s premises — 
namely, that a careful analysis of a given set of circumstances would 
necessarily lead all statesmen to the same conclusions. Just as Gerlach 
found it inconceivable that the principle of legitimacy could inspire more 
than one interpretation, it was beyond Bismarck’s comprehension that 
statesmen might differ in the way they assessed the national interest. 
Because of his magnificent grasp of the nuances of power and its ramifi- 
cations, Bismarck was able in his lifetime to replace the philosophical 


127 



Diplomacy 


constraints of the Metternich system with a policy of self-restraint. Be- 
cause these nuances were not as self-evident to Bismarck’s successors 
and imitators, the literal application of Realpolitik led to their excessive 
dependence on military power, and from there to an armament race and 
two world wars. 

Success is often so elusive that statesmen pursuing it rarely bother to 
consider that it. may impose its own penalties. Thus, at the beginning of 
his career, Bismarck was chiefly preoccupied with applying Realpolitik to 
destroying the world he found, which was still very 7 much dominated by 
Metternich’s principles. This required weaning Prussia from the idea that 
Austrian leadership in Germany was vital to Prussia’s security and to the 
preservation of conservative values. However true this might have been 
at the time of the Congress of Vienna, in the middle of the nineteenth 
century Prussia no longer needed the Austrian alliance to preserve do- 
mestic stability or European tranquillity. Indeed, according to Bismarck, 
the illusion of the need for an Austrian alliance served above all to inhibit 
Prussia from pursuing its ultimate goal of unifying Germany. 

As Bismarck saw it, Prussian history was resplendent with evidence that 
supported his claim of its primacy within Germany and of its ability to 
stand alone. For Prussia was not just another German state. Whatever its 
conservative domestic policies, they could not dim the national luster it 
had garnered through its tremendous sacrifices in the wars of liberation 
from Napoleon. It was as if Prussia’s very outlines — a series of oddly 
shaped enclaves stretching across the North German plain from the Vis- 
tula to west of the Rhine — had destined it to lead the quest for German 
unity, even in the eyes of the liberals. 

But Bismarck went further. He challenged the conventional wisdom 
which identified nationalism with liberalism, or at least with the pro- 
position that German unity could only be realized through liberal institu- 
tions: 

Prussia has become great not through liberalism and free-thinking but 
through a succession of powerful, decisive and wise regents who care- 
fully husbanded the military and financial resources of the state and 
kept them together in their own hands in order to throw them with 
ruthless courage into the scale of European politics as soon as a favor- 
able opportunity presented itself. . . . M 

Bismarck relied not on conservative principles but on the unique charac- 
ter of Prussian institutions; he rested Prussia’s claim to leadership in 
Germany on its strength rather than on universal values. In Bismarck’s 
view, Prussian institutions were so impervious to outside influence that 


128 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


Prussia could exploit the democratic currents of the period as instru- 
ments of foreign policy by threatening to encourage greater freedom of 
expression at home — never mind that no Prussian king had practiced 
such a policy for four decades, if ever: 

The sense of security that the King remains master in his country even 
if the whole army is abroad is not shared with Prussia by any other 
continental state and above all by no other German power. It provides 
the opportunity to accept a development of public affairs much more 

in conformity with present requirements The royal authority in 

Prussia is so firmly based that the government can without risk encour- 
age a much more lively parliamentary activity and thereby exert pres- 
sure on conditions in Germany. 35 

Bismarck rejected the Metternich view that a shared sense of their domes- 
tic vulnerability required the close association of the three Eastern Courts. 
Quite the opposite was the case. Since Prussia was not threatened by 
domestic upheaval, its very cohesiveness could serve as a weapon to 
undermine the Vienna settlement by threatening the other powers, espe- 
cially Austria, with policies fomenting domestic upheavals. For Bismarck, 
the strength of Prussia’s governmental, military, and financial institutions 
opened the road to Prussian primacy in Germany. 

When he was appointed ambassador to the Assembly of the Confedera- 
tion in 1852 and ambassador to St. Petersburg in 1858, Bismarck ascended 
to positions which enabled him to advocate his policies. His reports, 
brilliantly written and remarkably consistent, urged a foreign policy based 
on neither sentiment nor legitimacy but on the correct assessment 
of power. In this manner, Bismarck returned to the tradition of such 
eighteenth-century 7 rulers as Louis XIV and Frederick the Great. Enhanc- 
ing the influence of the state became the principal, if not the only, objec- 
tive, restrained solely by the forces massed against it: 

... A sentimental policy knows no reciprocity. It is an exclusively Prus- 
sian peculiarity. 36 

. . . For heaven’s sake no sentimental alliances in which the conscious- 
ness of having performed a good deed furnishes the sole reward for 
our sacrifice. 37 

. . . Policy is the art of the possible, the science of the relative. 38 

Not even the King has the right to subordinate the interests of the state 
to his personal sympathies or antipathies. 39 


129 



Diplomacy 


In Bismarck’s estimation, foreign policy had a nearly scientific basis, mak- 
ing it possible to analyze the national interest in terms of objective crite- 
ria. In such a calculation, Austria emerged as a foreign, not a fraternal, 
country, and above all as an obstacle to Prussia’s rightful place in Ger- 
many: “Our policy has no other parade ground than Germany and this is 
precisely the one which Austria believes it badly requires for itself . . . We 
deprive each other of the air we need to breathe. . . . This is a fact which 
cannot be ignored however unwelcome it may be.” 40 

The first Prussian king whom Bismarck served as ambassador, Freder- 
ick William IV, was torn between Gerlachs legitimist conservatism and 
the opportunities inherent in Bismarck’s Realpolitik . Bismarck insisted 
that his King’s personal regard for the traditionally pre-eminent German 
state must not inhibit Prussian policy. Since Austria would never accept 
Prussian hegemony in Germany, Bismarck’s strategy was to weaken Aus- 
tria at every turn. In 1854, during the Crimean War, Bismarck urged that 
Prussia exploit Austria’s break with Russia and attack what was still Prus- 
sia’s partner in the Holy Alliance without any better justification than the 
auspiciousness of the occasion: 

Could we succeed in getting Vienna to the point where it does not 
consider an attack by Prussia on Austria as something outside of all 
possibility we would soon hear more sensible things from there 41 

In 1859, during Austria’s war with France and Piedmont, Bismarck re- 
turned to the same theme: 

The present situation once more presents us with the great prize if we 
let the war between Austria and France become well established and 
then move south with our army taking the border posts in our field 
packs not to impale them again until we reach Lake Constance or at 
least the regions where the Protestant confession ceases to predomi- 
nate. 42 

Metternich would have considered this heresy, but Frederick the Great 
would have applauded a disciple’s clever adaptation of his own rationale 
for conquering Silesia. 

Bismarck subjected the European balance of power to the same cold- 
blooded, relativistic analysis as he did the internal German situation. At 
the height of the Crimean War, Bismarck outlined the principal options 
for Prussia: 

We have three threats available: (1) An alliance with Russia; and it is 
nonsense always to swear at once that we will never go with Russia. 


130 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


Even if it were true, we should retain the option to use it as a threat. 

( 2 ) A policy in which we throw ourselves into Austria’s arms and com- 
pensate ourselves at the expense of perfidious [German] confederates. 

(3) A change of cabinets to the left whereby we would soon become so 
“Western” as to outmaneuver Austria completely. 43 


In the same dispatch were listed as equally valid Prussian options: an 
alliance with Russia against France (presumably on the basis of a commu- 
nity of conservative interests); an arrangement with Austria against the 
secondary 7 German states (and presumably against Russia); and a shift 
toward liberalism domestically directed against Austria and Russia (pre- 
sumably in combination with France). Like Richelieu, Bismarck felt unfet- 
tered in his choice of partners, being prepared to ally himself with Russia, 
Austria, or France; the choice would depend entirely on which could best 
serve the Prussian national interest. Though a bitter opponent of Austria, 
Bismarck was prepared to explore an arrangement with Vienna in return 
for appropriate compensation in Germany. And although he was an arch- 
conservative in domestic affairs, Bismarck saw no obstacle to shifting 
Prussia’s domestic policy to the left as long as it served a foreign policy 
purpose. For domestic policy, too, was a tool of Realpolitik. 

Attempts to tilt the balance of power had, of course, occurred even in 
the heyday of the Metternich system. But then every effort would have 
been made to legitimize the change by means of European consensus. 
The Metternich system sought adjustments through European congresses 
rather than through a foreign policy of threat and counterthreat. Bismarck 
would have been the last person to reject the efficacy of moral consensus. 
But to him, it was only one element of power among many. The stability 
of the international order depended precisely on this nuance. Pressuring 
for change without so much as paying lip service to existing treaty rela- 
tionships, shared values, or the Concert of Europe marked a diplomatic 
revolution. In time, turning power into the only criterion induced all 
nations to conduct armament races and foreign policies of confrontation. 

Bismarck’s views remained academic as long as the key element of the 
Vienna settlement — the unity of the conservative courts of Prussia, Aus- 
tria, and Russia — was still intact, and as long as Prussia by itself did not 
dare to rupture that unity. The Holy Alliance disintegrated unexpectedly 
and quite rapidly after the Crimean War, when Austria abandoned the 
deft anonymity by which Metternich had deflected crises from his rickety 
empire and, after many vacillations, sided with Russia’s enemies. Bis- 
marck understood at once that the Crimean War had wrought a diplo- 
matic revolution. “The day of reckoning,” he said, “is sure to come even 
if a few years pass.” 44 


131 



Diplomacy 


Indeed, perhaps the most important document relating to the Crimean 
War was a dispatch from Bismarck analyzing the situation upon the con- 
clusion of the war in 1856. Characteristically, the dispatch assumed per- 
fect flexibility of diplomatic method and a total absence of scruple in the 
pursuit of opportunity. German historiography has aptly named Bis- 
marck’s dispatch the “Prachtbericht, ” or the “Master Dispatch.” For assem- 
bled therein was the essence of Realpolitik, though it was still too daring 
for its addressee, the Prussian Prime Minister, Otto von Manteuffel, whose 
numerous marginal comments indicate that he was far from persuaded 
by it. 

Bismarck opened with an exposition of Napoleon’s extraordinarily fa- 
vorable position at the end of the Crimean War. Henceforth, he noted, all 
the states of Europe would be seeking France’s friendship, none with a 
greater prospect of success than Russia: 

An alliance between France and Russia is too natural that it should not 

come to pass Up to now the firmness of the Holy Alliance . . . has 

kept the two states apart; but with the Tsar Nicholas dead and the Holy 
Alliance dissolved by Austria, nothing remains to arrest the natural 
rapprochement of two states with nary a conflicting interest. 45 

Bismarck predicted that Austria had maneuvered itself into a trap from 
which it would not be able to escape by racing the Tsar to Paris. For in 
order to retain the support of his army, Napoleon would require some 
issue which could furnish him at a moment’s notice with “a not too 
arbitrary and unjust pretext for intervention. Italy is ideally suited for this 
role. The ambitions of Sardinia, the memories of Bonaparte and Murat, 
furnish sufficient excuses and the hatred of Austria will smooth its way.” 46 
This was, of course, exactly what happened three years later. 

How should Prussia position itself in light of the inevitability of tacit 
Franco-Russian cooperation and the likelihood of a Franco-Austrian con- 
flict? According to the Metternich system, Prussia should have tightened 
its alliance with conservative Austria, strengthened the German Confeder- 
ation, established close relations with Great Britain, and sought to wean 
Russia away from Napoleon. 

Bismarck demolished each of these options in turn. Great Britain’s land 
forces were too negligible to be of use against a Franco-Russian alliance. 
Austria and Prussia would end up having to bear the brunt of the fighting. 
Nor could the German Confederation add any real strength: 

Aided by Russia, Prussia, and Austria, the German Confederation would 
probably hold together, because it would believe in victory even with- 
out its support; but in the case of a two-front war toward East and West, 


132 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


those princes who are not under the control of our bayonets would 
attempt to save themselves through declarations of neutrality, if they 
did not appear in the field against us 47 

Although Austria had been Prussia’s principal ally for over a generation, 
it now presented a rather incongruous partner in Bismarck’s eyes. It had 
become the main obstacle to Prussia’s growth: “Germany is too small for 
the two of us . . . , as long as we plough the same furrow, Austria is the 
only state against which we can make a permanent gain and to which we 
can suffer a permanent loss.” 48 

Whatever aspect of international relations he considered, Bismarck re- 
solved it by the argument that Prussia needed to break its confederate 
bond to Austria and reverse the policies of the Metternich period in order 
to weaken its erstwhile ally at every opportunity: “When Austria hitches a 
horse in front, we hitch one behind.” 49 

The bane of stable international systems is their nearly total inability 
to envision mortal challenge. The blind spot of revolutionaries is their 
conviction that they can combine all the benefits of their goals with the 
best of what they are overthrowing. But the forces unleashed by revolu- 
tion have their own momentum, and the direction in which they are 
moving cannot necessarily be deduced from the proclamations of their 
advocates. 

So it was with Bismarck. Within five years of coming to power in 1862, 
he eliminated the Austrian obstacle to German unity by implementing his 
own advice of the previous decade. Through the three wars described 
earlier in this chapter, he expelled Austria from Germany and destroyed 
lingering Richelieuan illusions in France. 

The new united Germany did not embody the ideals of the two genera- 
tions of Germans who had aspired to build a constitutional, democratic 
state. In fact, it reflected no previous significant strain of German thinking, 
having come into being as a diplomatic compact among German sover- 
eigns rather than as an expression of popular will. Its legitimacy derived 
from Prussia’s power, not from the principle of national self-determina- 
tion. Though Bismarck achieved what he had set out to do, the very 
magnitude of his triumph mortgaged the future of Germany and, indeed, 
of the European world order. To be sure, he was as moderate in conclud- 
ing his wars as he had been ruthless in preparing them. As soon as 
Germany had achieved the borders he considered vital to its security, 
Bismarck conducted a prudent and stabilizing foreign policy. For two 
decades, he maneuvered Europe’s commitments and interests in masterly 
fashion on the basis of Realpolitik and to the benefit of the peace of 
Europe. 


133 



Diplomacy 


But, once called forth, the spirits of power refused to be banished by 
juggling acts, however spectacular or restrained these were. Germany 
had been unified as the result of a diplomacy presupposing infinite adapt- 
ability; yet the very success of that policy removed all flexibility from the 
international system. There were now fewer participants. And when the 
number of players declines, the capacity to make adjustments diminishes. 
The new international system contained both fewer and weightier com- 
ponents, making it difficult to negotiate a generally acceptable balance or 
to sustain it without constant tests of strength. 

These structural problems were magnified by the scope of Prussia’s 
victory in the Franco-Prussian War and by the nature of the peace that 
concluded it. The German annexation of Alsace-Lorraine produced irrec- 
oncilable French antagonism, which eliminated any German diplomatic 
option toward France. 

In the 1850s, Bismarck had considered the French option so essential 
that he had sacrificed his friendship with Gerlach to promote it. After the 
annexation of Alsace-Lorraine, French enmity grew into the “organic fault 
of our nature” against which Bismarck had warned so insistently. And it 
precluded the policy of his “Master Dispatch” of remaining aloof until 
other powers were already committed, then selling Prussia’s support to 
whoever offered it the most. 

The German Confederation had succeeded in acting as a unit only in 
the face of threats so overwhelming that they had obliterated the rivalries 
among the various states; and joint offensive action was structurally im- 
possible. The tenuousness of these arrangements was indeed one of the 
reasons Bismarck had insisted that German unification be organized 
under Prussian leadership. But he also paid a price for the new arrange- 
ment. Once Germany was transformed from a potential victim of aggres- 
sion to a threat to the European equilibrium, the remote contingency of 
the other states of Europe uniting against Germany became a real possi- 
bility. And that nightmare in turn drove a German policy that was soon to 
split Europe into two hostile camps. 

The European statesman who grasped the impact of German unifica- 
tion most quickly was Benjamin Disraeli, who was about to become Brit- 
ish Prime Minister. In 1871, he said the following about the Franco- 
Prussian War: 

The war represents the German revolution, a greater political event 
than the French Revolution of the last century There is not a dip- 

lomatic tradition which has not been swept away. You have a new 
world The balance of power has been entirely destroyed. 150 


134 



Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 


While Bismarck was at the helm, these dilemmas were obscured by his 
intricate and subtle diplomacy. Yet in the long term, the very complexity 
of Bismarck’s arrangements doomed them. Disraeli was right on the 
mark. Bismarck had recast the map of Europe and the pattern of interna- 
tional relations, but in the end he was not able to establish a design his 
successors could follow. Once the novelty of Bismarck’s tactics had worn 
off, his successors and competitors sought safety in multiplying arms as a 
way of reducing their reliance on the baffling intangibles of diplomacy. 
The Iron Chancellor’s inability to institutionalize his policies forced Ger- 
many onto a diplomatic treadmill it could only escape, first by an arms 
race, and then by war. 

In his domestic policy as well, Bismarck was unable to establish a 
design his successors could follow. Bismarck, a solitary figure in his 
lifetime, was even less understood after he passed from the scene and 
attained mythic proportions. His compatriots remembered the three wars 
which had achieved German unity but forgot the painstaking preparations 
that had made them possible, and the moderation required to reap their 
fruits. They had seen displays of power but without discerning the subtle 
analysis on which these had been based. 

The constitution which Bismarck had designed for Germany com- 
pounded these tendencies. Though based on the first universal male 
suffrage in Europe, the Parliament (the Reichstag) did not control the 
government, which was appointed by the Emperor and could only be 
removed by him. The Chancellor was closer to both the Emperor and the 
Reichstag than each was to the other. Therefore, within limits, Bismarck 
could play Germany’s domestic institutions off against each other, much 
as he did the other states in his foreign policy. None of Bismarck’s succes- 
sors possessed the skill or the daring to do so. The result was that nation- 
alism unleavened by democracy turned increasingly chauvinistic, while 
democracy without responsibility grew sterile. The essence of Bismarck’s 
life was perhaps best expressed by the Iron Chancellor himself in a letter 
he had written to his then still future wife: 

That which is imposing here on earth ... has always something of the 

quality of the fallen angel who is beautiful but without peace, great in 

his conceptions and exertions but without success, proud and lonely . 51 


The two revolutionaries who stood at the beginning of the contemporary 
European state system incarnated many of the dilemmas of the modern 
period. Napoleon, the reluctant revolutionary, represented the trend of 


135 



Diplomacy 


gearing policy to public relations. Bismarck, the conservative revolution- 
ary, reflected the tendency to identify policy with the analysis of power. 

Napoleon had revolutionary ideas but recoiled before their implica- 
tions. Having spent his youth in what the twentieth century would call 
protest, he never bridged the gap between the formulation of an idea and 
its implementation. Insecure about his purposes and indeed his legiti- 
macy, he relied on public opinion to bridge that gap. Napoleon con- 
ducted his foreign policy in the style of modern political leaders who 
measure their success by the reaction of the television evening news. Like 
them, Napoleon made himself a prisoner of the purely tactical, focusing 
on short-term objectives and immediate results, seeking to impress his 
public by magnifying the pressures he had set out to create. In the pro- 
cess, he confused foreign policy with the moves of a conjurer. For in the 
end, it is reality, not publicity, that determines whether a leader has made 
a difference. 

The public does not in the long run respect leaders who mirror its 
own insecurities or see only the symptoms of crises rather than the long- 
term trends. The role of the leader is to assume the burden of acting on 
the basis of a confidence in his own assessment of the direction of events 
and how they can be influenced. Failing that, crises will multiply, which 
is another way of saying that a leader has lost control over events. Napo- 
leon turned out to be the precursor of a strange modern phenomenon — 
the political figure who desperately seeks to determine what the public 
wants, yet ends up rejected and perhaps even despised by it. 

Bismarck did not lack the confidence to act on his own judgments. He 
brilliantly analyzed the underlying reality and Prussia’s opportunity. He 
built so well that the Germany he created survived defeat in two world 
wars, two foreign occupations, and two generations as a divided country. 
Where Bismarck failed was in having doomed his society to a style of 
policy which could only have been carried on had a great man emerged 
in every generation. This is rarely the case, and the institutions of imperial 
Germany militated against it. In this sense, Bismarck sowed the seeds not 
only of his country’s achievements, but of its twentieth-century tragedies. 
“No one eats with impunity from the tree of immortality ,” 52 wrote Bis- 
marck’s friend von Roon about him. 

Napoleon’s tragedy was that his ambitions surpassed his capacities; 
Bismarck’s tragedy was that his capacities exceeded his society’s ability to 
absorb them. The legacy Napoleon left France was strategic paralysis; the 
legacy Bismarck left Germany was unassimilable greatness. 


136 



CHAPTER SIX 


Realpolitik Turns on Itself 

Realpolitik — foreign policy based on calculations of power and the na- 
tional interest — brought about the unification of Germany, And the uni- 
fication of Germany caused Realpolitik to turn on itself, accomplishing 
the opposite of what it was meant to achieve. For the practice of Real- 
politik avoids armaments races and war only if the major players of an 
international system are free to adjust their relations in accordance with 
changing circumstances or are restrained by a system of shared values, or 
both. 

After its unification, Germany became the strongest country on the 
Continent, and was growing stronger with every decade, thereby revolu- 
tionizing European diplomacy. Ever since the emergence of the modern 
state system in Richelieu’s time, the powers at the edge of Europe — Great 
Britain, France, and Russia — had been exerting pressure on the center. 
Now, for the first time, the center of Europe was becoming sufficiently 
powerful to press on the periphery. How would Europe deal with this 
new giant in its midst? 

Geography had created an insoluble dilemma. According to all the 
traditions of Realpolitik, European coalitions were likely to arise to con- 


137 



Diplomacy 


tain Germany’s growing, potentially dominant, power. Since Germany 
was located in the center of the Continent, it stood in constant danger of 
what Bismarck called “le cauchemar des coalitions ” — the nightmare of 
hostile, encircling coalitions. But if Germany tried to protect itself against 
a coalition of all its neighbors — East and West — simultaneously, it was 
certain to threaten them individually, speeding up the formation of coali- 
tions. Self-fulfilling prophecies became a part of the international system. 
What was still called the Concert of Europe was in fact riven by two sets 
of animosities: the enmity between France and Germany, and the growing 
hostility between the Austro-Hungarian and the Russian Empires. 

As for France and Germany, the magnitude of Prussia’s victory in the 
1870 war had produced a permanent French desire for revanche, and 
German annexation of Alsace-Lorraine gave this resentment a tangible 
focal point. Resentment soon mixed with fear as French leaders began to 
sense that the war of 1870-71 had marked the end of the era of French 
predominance and an irrevocable change in the alignment of forces. 
The Richelieu system of playing the various German states off against 
each other in a fragmented Central Europe no longer applied. Torn be- 
tween memory and ambition, France sublimated its frustrations for 
nearly fifty years in the single-minded pursuit of regaining Alsace- 
Lorraine, never considering that success in this effort could do no more 
than salve French pride without altering the underlying strategic reality. 
By itself, France was no longer strong enough to contain Germany; hence- 
forth it would always need allies to defend itself. By the same token, 
France made itself permanently available as the potential ally of any 
enemy of Germany, thereby restricting the flexibility of German diplo- 
macy and escalating any crisis involving Germany. 

The second European schism, between the Austro-Hungarian Empire 
and Russia, also resulted from German unification. Upon becoming Minis- 
terprasident in 1862, Bismarck had asked the Austrian ambassador to 
convey to his Emperor the startling proposition that Austria, the capital of 
the ancient Holy Roman Empire, move its center of gravity from Vienna 
to Budapest. The ambassador considered the idea so preposterous that, 
in his report to Vienna, he ascribed it to nervous exhaustion on the 
part of Bismarck. Yet, once defeated in the struggle for pre-eminence in 
Germany, Austria had no choice but to act on Bismarck’s suggestion. 
Budapest became an equal, occasionally dominant partner in the newly 
created Dual Monarchy. 

After its expulsion from Germany, the new Austro-Hungarian Empire 
had no place to expand except into the Balkans. Since Austria had not 
participated in overseas colonialism, its leaders had come to view the 
Balkans, with its Slavic population, as the natural arena for Austrian geo- 


138 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


political ambitions — if only to keep pace with the other Great Powers. 
Inherent in such a policy was conflict with Russia. 

Common sense should have cautioned Austrian leaders against pro- 
voking Balkan nationalism, or taking on Russia as a permanent enemy. 
But common sense was not in abundant supply in Vienna, and even less 
so in Budapest. Jingoistic nationalism prevailed. The Cabinet in Vienna 
continued on its course of inertia at home and fits of hysteria in foreign 
policy, which had progressively isolated it since Metternich’s time. 

Germany perceived no national interest in the Balkans. But it did per- 
ceive a major interest in the preservation of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. 
For the collapse of the Dual Monarchy would have risked undoing Bis- 
marck’s entire German policy. The German-speaking Catholic segment of 
the empire would seek to join Germany, jeopardizing the pre-eminence 
of Protestant Prussia, for which Bismarck had struggled so tenaciously. 
And the disintegration of the Austrian Empire would leave Germany with- 
out a single dependable ally. On the other hand, though Bismarck wanted 
to preserve Austria, he had no desire to challenge Russia. It was a conun- 
drum he could obscure for some decades, but never quite overcome. 

To make matters worse, the Ottoman Empire was in the throes of a 
slow disintegration, creating frequent clashes between the Great Powers 
over the division of the spoils. Bismarck once said that, in a combination 
of five players, it is always desirable to be on the side of the three. But 
since, of the five Great Powers — England, France, Russia, Austria, and 
Germany — France was hostile, Great Britain unavailable due to its policy 
of “splendid isolation,” and Russia ambivalent because of its conflict with 
Austria, Germany needed an alliance with both Russia and Austria for 
such a grouping of three. Only a statesman possessed of Bismarck’s will- 
power and skill could even have conceived such a precarious balancing 
act. Thus, the relationship between Germany and Russia became the key 
to the peace of Europe. 

Once Russia entered the international arena, it established a dominant 
position with astonishing speed. At the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, Russia 
had not yet been deemed sufficiently important to be represented. From 
1750 onward, however, Russia became an active participant in every sig- 
nificant European war. By the middle of the eighteenth century, Russia 
was already inspiring a vague uneasiness in Western observers. In 1762, 
the French charge d'affaires in St. Petersburg reported: 

If Russian ambition is not checked, its effects may be fatal to the neigh- 
boring powers. ... I know that the degree of Russian power should not 
be measured by its expanse and that its domination of eastern territor- 
ies is more an imposing phantom than a source of real strength. But I 


139 



Diplomacy 


also suspect that a nation which is capable of braving the intemperance 
of the seasons better than any other because of the rigor of its native 
climate, which is accustomed to servile obedience, which needs little 
to live and is therefore able to wage war at little cost . . . such a nation, 

I suspect, is likely to conquer — 1 

By the time the Congress of Vienna took place, Russia was arguably the 
most powerful country on the Continent. By the middle of the twentieth 
century, it had achieved the rank of one of only two global superpowers 
before imploding, nearly forty years later, losing many of its vast gains of 
the previous two centuries in a matter of months. 

The absolute nature of the tsar’s power enabled Russia’s rulers to con- 
duct foreign policy both arbitrarily and idiosyncratically. In the space of 
six years, between 1756 and 1762, Russia entered the Seven Years’ War 
on the side of Austria and invaded Prussia, switched to Prussia’s side at 
the death of Empress Elizabeth in January 1762, and then withdrew into 
neutrality when Catherine the Great overthrew her husband in June 1762. 
Fifty years later, Metternich would point out that Tsar Alexander I had 
never held a single set of beliefs for longer than five years. Metternich’s 
adviser, Friedrich von Gentz, described the position of the Tsar as follows: 
“None of the obstacles that restrain and thwart the other sovereigns — 
divided authority, constitutional forms, public opinion, etc. — exists for 
the Emperor of Russia. What he dreams of at night he can carry out in the 
morning.” 2 

Paradox was Russia’s most distinguishing feature. Constantly at war and 
expanding in every direction, it nevertheless considered itself perma- 
nently threatened. The more polyglot the empire became, the more vul- 
nerable Russia felt, partly because of its need to isolate the various 
nationalities from their neighbors. To sustain their rule and to surmount 
the tensions among the empire’s various populations, all of Russia’s rulers 
invoked the myth of some vast, foreign threat, which, in time, turned 
into another of the self-fulfilling prophecies that doomed the stability of 
Europe. 

As Russia expanded from the area around Moscow toward the center 
of Europe, the shores of the Pacific, and into Central Asia, its quest for 
security evolved into expansion for its own sake. The Russian historian 
Vasili Kliuchevsky described the process as follows: “. . . these wars, de- 
fensive in their origin, imperceptibly and unintentionally on the part of 
the Muscovite politicians became wars of aggression — a direct continua- 
tion of the unifying policy of the old [pre-Romanov] dynasty, a struggle 
for Russian territory that had never belonged to the Muscovite state.” 3 


140 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


Russia gradually turned into as much of a threat to the balance of 
power in Europe as it did to the sovereignty of neighbors around its vast 
periphery. No matter how much territory it controlled, Russia inexorably 
pushed its borders outward. This started out as an essentially defensive 
motivation, as when Prince Potemkin (best known for placing fake vil- 
lages along the Tsarinas routes) advocated the conquest of the Crimea 
from Turkey in 1776 on the reasonable ground that this would improve 
Russia’s capacity to defend its realm. 4 By 1864, however, security had 
become synonymous with continuous expansion. Chancellor Aleksandr 
Gorchakov defined Russia’s expansion in Central Asia in terms of a per- 
manent obligation to pacify its periphery driven forward by sheer mo- 
mentum: 


The situation of Russia in Central Asia is similar to that of all civilized 
states that come into contact with half-savage nomadic tribes without a 
firm social organization. In such cases, the interests of border security 
and trade relations always require that the more civilized state have a 
certain authority over its neighbors — 

The state therefore must make a choice: either to give up this contin- 
uous effort and doom its borders to constant unrest ... or else to ad- 
vance farther and farther into the heart of the savage lands . . . where 
the greatest difficulty lies in being able to stop . 5 


Many historians recalled this passage when the Soviet Union invaded 
Afghanistan in 1979. 

Paradoxically, it is also true that for the past 200 years the European 
balance of power has been preserved on several occasions by Russian 
efforts and heroism. Without Russia, Napoleon and Hitler would almost 
certainly have succeeded in establishing universal empires. Janus-like, 
Russia was at once a threat to the balance of power and one of its key 
components, essential to the equilibrium but not fully a part of it. For 
much of its history, Russia accepted only the limits that were imposed on 
it by the outside world, and even these grudgingly. And yet there were 
periods, most notably the forty years after the end of the Napoleonic 
Wars, when Russia did not take advantage of its vast power, and instead 
put this power in the service of protecting conservative values in Central 
and Western Europe. 

Even when Russia was pursuing legitimacy, its attitudes were far more 
messianic — and therefore imperialistic — than those of the other con- 
servative courts. Whereas Western European conservatives defined them- 
selves by philosophies of self-restraint, Russian leaders enlisted them- 


141 



Diplomacy 


selves in the service of crusades. Because the tsars faced virtually no 
challenge to their legitimacy, they had little understanding of republican 
movements beyond deeming them to be immoral. Promoters of the unity 
of conservative values — at least until the Crimean War — they were also 
prepared to use legitimacy to expand their own influence, earning Nicho- 
las I the sobriquet of “gendarme of Europe.” At the height of the Holy 
Alliance, Friedrich von Gentz wrote this about Alexander I: 

The Emperor Alexander, despite all the zeal and enthusiasm he has 
consistently shown for the Grand Alliance, is the sovereign who could 

most easily get along without it For him the Grand Alliance is only 

an implement with which he exercises in general affairs the influence 
that is one of the main objects of his ambition. . . . His interest in the 
preservation of the system is not, as is true of Austria, Prussia, or En- 
gland, an interest based on necessity or fear; it is a free and calculated 
interest, which he is in a position to renounce as soon as a different 
system should offer him greater advantages . 6 

Like Americans, Russians thought of their society as exceptional. Encoun- 
tering only nomadic or feudal societies, Russia’s expansion into Central 
Asia had many of the features of America’s own westward expansion, and 
the Russian justification for it, in keeping with the Gorchakov citation 
above, paralleled the way Americans explained their own “manifest des- 
tiny.” But the closer Russia approached India, the more it aroused British 
suspicions, until, in the second half of the nineteenth century, Russian 
expansion into Central Asia, unlike America’s westward march, turned 
into a foreign policy problem. 

The openness of each country’s frontiers was among the few common 
features of American and Russian exceptionalism. America’s sense of 
uniqueness was based on the concept of liberty; Russia’s sprang from 
the experience of common suffering. Everyone was eligible to share in 
America’s values; Russia’s were available only to the Russian nation, to the 
exclusion of most of its non-Russian subjects. America’s exceptionalism 
led it to isolationism alternating with occasional moral crusades; Russia’s 
evoked a sense of mission which often led to military adventures. 

The Russian nationalist publicist Mikhail Katkov defined the difference 
between Western and Russian values as follows: 

. . . everything there is based on contractual relations and everything 
here on faith; this contrast was originally determined by the position 
the church adopted in the West and that which it adopted in the East. A 
basic dual authority exists there; a single authority here . 7 


142 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


Nationalist Russian and Pan-Slavic writers and intellectuals invariably as- 
cribed the alleged altruism of the Russian nation to its Orthodox faith. The 
great novelist and passionate nationalist Fyodor Dostoyevsky interpreted 
Russian altruism as an obligation to liberate Slavic peoples from foreign 
rule, if necessary by defying the opposition of the whole of Western 
Europe. During Russia’s 1877 campaign in the Balkans, Dostoyevsky 
wrote: 


Ask the people; ask the soldier; Why are they arising? Why are they 
going to war and what do they expect from it? They will tell you, as one 
man, that they are going to serve Christ and to liberate the oppressed 
brethren. . . . [W]e shall watch over their mutual harmony and protect 
their liberty and independence, be it even against all Europe . 8 


Unlike the states of Western Europe, which Russia simultaneously ad- 
mired, despised, and envied, Russia perceived itself not as a nation but as 
a cause, beyond geopolitics, impelled by faith, and held together by arms. 
Dostoyevsky did not confine the role of Russia to liberating fellow Slavs 
and included watching over their harmony — a social undertaking which 
easily shaded over into domination. To Katkov, Russia was the Third 
Rome: 


The Russian tsar is more than the heir of his ancestors; he is the succes- 
sor of the caesars of Eastern Rome, of the organizers of the church and 
of its councils which established the very creed of the Christian faith. 
With the fall of Byzantium, Moscow arose and the greatness of Russia 
began . 9 


After the Revolution, the passionate sense of mission was transferred to 
the Communist International. 

The paradox of Russian history lies in the continuing ambivalence 
between messianic drive and a pervasive sense of insecurity. In its ulti- 
mate aberration, this ambivalence generated a fear that, unless the empire 
expanded, it would implode. Thus, when Russia acted as the prime mover 
in the partitioning of Poland, it did so partly for security reasons and 
partly for eighteenth-century-style aggrandizement. A century later, that 
conquest had taken on an autonomous significance. In 1869, Rostislav 
Andreievich Fadeyev, a Pan-Slavist officer, wrote in his influential essay, 
“Opinion on the Eastern Question,” that Russia had to continue its west- 
ward march to protect its existing conquests: 


143 



Diplomacy 


The historical move of Russia from the Dnieper to the Vistula [the 
partition of Poland] was a declaration of war to Europe, which had 
broken into a part of the Continent which did not belong to her. Russia 
now stands in the midst of the enemy’s lines — such a condition is 
only temporary, she must either drive back the enemy or abandon 
the position . . . must either extend her preeminence to the Adriatic or 
withdraw again beyond the Dnieper 10 

Fadeyev’s analysis was not very different from George Kennan’s, which 
was made from the opposite side of the dividing line, in his seminal 
article on the sources of Soviet conduct. In it, he predicted that if the 
Soviet Union did not succeed in expanding, it would implode and col- 
lapse. 11 

Russia’s exalted view of itself was rarely shared by the outside world. 
Despite extraordinary achievements in literature and music, Russia never 
emerged as the same sort of cultural magnet for its conquered peoples 
as did the mother countries of some of the other colonial empires. Nor 
was the Russian Empire ever perceived as a model, either by other socie- 
ties or by its own subjects. To the outside world, Russia was an elemental 
force — a mysterious, expansionist presence to be feared and contained, 
by either co-optation or confrontation. 

Metternich had tried the route of co-optation and, for a generation, had 
been largely successful. But after the unification of Germany and Italy, 
the great ideological causes of the first half of the nineteenth century had 
lost their unifying force. Nationalism and revolutionary republicanism 
were no longer perceived as threats to the European order. As national- 
ism became the prevailing organizing principle, the crowned heads of 
Russia, Prussia, and Austria had less and less need to join together in a 
common defense of legitimacy. 

Metternich had been able to establish an approximation of European 
government because the rulers of Europe considered their ideological 
unity as the indispensable breakwater against revolution. But by the 
1870s, either the fear of revolution had subsided or the various govern- 
ments thought they could defeat it without outside assistance. By now, 
two generations had passed since the execution of Louis XVI; the liberal 
revolutions of 1848 had been mastered; France, though a republic, had 
lost its proselytizing zeal. No common ideological bond now constrained 
the ever-sharpening conflict between Russia and Austria over the Balkans, 
or between Germany and France over Alsace-Lorraine. When the Great 
Powers viewed each other, they no longer saw partners in a common 
cause but dangerous, even mortal, rivals. Confrontation emerged as the 
standard diplomatic method. 


144 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


In an earlier period, Great Britain had contributed to restraint by acting 
as the balancer of the European equilibrium. Even now, of all the major 
European countries, only Great Britain was in a position to conduct a 
balance-of-power diplomacy unfettered by irreconcilable animosity to- 
ward some other power. But Great Britain had grown confused as to what 
constituted the central threat, and would not regain its bearings for sev- 
eral decades. 

The balance of power of the Vienna system, with which Great Britain 
was familiar, had been radically altered. Unified Germany was achieving 
the strength to dominate Europe all by itself — an occurrence which Great 
Britain had always resisted in the past when it came about by conquest. 
However, most British leaders, Disraeli excepted, saw no reason to op- 
pose a process of national consolidation in Central Europe, which British 
statesmen had welcomed for decades, especially when its culmination 
occurred as the result of a war in which France had been technically the 
aggressor. 

Ever since Canning had distanced Great Britain from Metternich’s sys- 
tem forty years earlier, Great Britain’s policy of splendid isolation had 
enabled it to play the role of protector of the equilibrium largely because 
no single country was capable of dominating the Continent by itself. After 
unification, Germany progressively acquired that capacity. And, confus- 
ingly, it did so by means of developing its own national territory and not 
by conquest. It was Great Britain’s style to intervene only when the bal- 
ance of power was actually under attack and not against the prospect of 
attack. Since it took decades for the German threat to the European 
equilibrium to become explicit, Great Britain’s foreign policy concerns 
for the rest of the century were focused on France, whose colonial ambi- 
tions clashed with those of Great Britain, especially in Egypt, and on 
Russia’s advance toward the Straits, Persia, India, and later toward China. 
All of these were colonial issues. In regard to European diplomacy, which 
produced the crises and wars of the twentieth century, Great Britain 
continued to practice its policy of splendid isolation. 

Bismarck was therefore the dominant figure of European diplomacy 
until he was dismissed from office in 1890. He wanted peace for the 
newly created German Empire and sought no confrontation with any 
other nation. But in the absence of moral bonds among the European 
states, he faced a Herculean task. He was obliged to keep both Russia and 
Austria out of the camp of his French enemy. This required preventing 
Austrian challenges to legitimate Russian objectives and keeping Russia 
from undermining the Austro-Hungarian Empire. He needed good rela- 
tions with Russia without antagonizing Great Britain, which was keeping 


145 



Diplomacy 


a wary eye on Russian designs on Constantinople and India. Even a genius 
like Bismarck could not have performed such a precarious balancing 
act indefinitely; the intensifying strains on the international system were 
becoming less and less manageable. Nevertheless, for the nearly twenty 
years that Bismarck led Germany, he practiced the Realpolitik he had 
preached with such moderation and subtlety that the balance of power 
never broke down. 

Bismarck’s goal was to give no other power — except irreconcilable 
France— any cause to join an alliance directed against Germany. Pro- 
fessing the unified Germany to be “satiated” and without further territo- 
rial ambitions, Bismarck sought to reassure Russia that Germany had no 
interest in the Balkans; the Balkans, he said, were not worth the bones of 
a single Pomeranian grenadier. Keeping Great Britain in mind, Bismarck 
mounted no challenge on the Continent that might trigger a British con- 
cern for the equilibrium, and he kept Germany out of the colonial race. 
“Here is Russia and here is France and here we are in the middle. That 
is my map of Africa,” was Bismarck’s reply to an advocate of German 
colonialism 12 — a piece of advice domestic politics would later force him 
to modify. 

Reassurance was not enough, however. What Germany needed was an 
alliance with both Russia and Austria, improbable as that appeared at first 
glance. Yet Bismarck forged just such an alliance in 1873 — the first so- 
called Three Emperors’ League. Proclaiming the unity of the three conser- 
vative courts, it looked a great deal like Metternich’s Holy Alliance. Had 
Bismarck suddenly developed an affection for the Metternich system 
which he had done so much to destroy? The times had changed largely 
as a result of Bismarck’s successes. Though Germany, Russia, and Austria 
pledged in true Metternich fashion to cooperate in the repression of 
subversive tendencies in each other’s domains, a common aversion to 
political radicals could no longer hold the Eastern Courts together — 
above all because each had become confident that domestic upheavals 
could be repressed without outside aid. 

Moreover, Bismarck had lost his solid legitimist credentials. Though 
his correspondence with Gerlach (see chapter 5) had not been made 
public, his underlying attitudes were common knowledge. As an advocate 
of Realpolitik throughout his public career, he could not suddenly make 
dedication to legitimacy credible. The increasingly bitter geopolitical ri- 
valry between Russia and Austria came to transcend the unity of conserva- 
tive monarchs. Each was in pursuit of the Balkan spoils of the decaying 
Turkish Empire. Pan-Slavism and old-fashioned expansionism were con- 
tributing to an adventurous Russian policy in the Balkans. Plain fear was 
producing parallel attitudes in the Austro-Hungarian Empire. Thus, while 


146 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


on paper the German Emperor had an alliance with his fellow conserva- 
tive monarchs in Russia and Austria, these two brethren were in fact at 
each other’s throats. The challenge of how to deal with two partners who 
perceived each other as mortal threats was destined to torment Bis- 
marck’s alliance system for the remainder of his days. 

The first Three Emperors’ League taught Bismarck that he could no 
longer control the forces he had unleashed by appealing to Austria’s and 
Russia’s domestic principles. Henceforth, he would attempt to manipulate 
them by emphasizing power and self-interest. 

Two events above all demonstrated that Realpolitik had become the 
dominant trend of the period. The first occurred in 1875 in the form of a 
pseudo-crisis, a contrived war scare triggered by an editorial in a leading 
German newspaper bearing the provocative headline “Is War Imminent?” 
The editorial had been placed in reaction to an increase in French mili- 
tary expenditures and the purchase of a large number of horses by the 
French military. Bismarck may well have inspired the war scare without 
intending to go any further, for there was no partial German mobilization 
or threatening troop movements. 

Facing down a nonexistent threat is an easy way to enhance a nation’s 
standing. Clever French diplomacy created the impression that Germany 
was planning a pre-emptive attack. The French Foreign Office put out the 
story that, in a conversation with the French Ambassador, the Tsar had 
indicated he would support France in a Franco-German conflict. Great 
Britain, ever sensitive to the threat of a single power dominating Europe, 
began to stir. Prime Minister Disraeli instructed his Foreign Secretary, 
Lord Derby, to approach Russian Chancellor Gorchakov with the idea of 
intimidating Berlin.- 

My own impression is that we should construct some concerted move- 
ment to preserve the peace of Europe like Pam [Lord Palmerston] did 
when he baffled France and expelled the Egyptians from Syria. There 
might be an alliance between Russia and ourselves for this special 
purpose; and other powers, as Austria and perhaps Italy might be in- 
vited to accede. . . , 13 

That Disraeli, deeply distrustful of Russia’s imperial ambitions, could even 
hint at an Anglo-Russian alliance showed how seriously he took the pros- 
pect of German domination of Western Europe. The war scare subsided 
as quickly as it had blown up, so Disraeli’s scheme was never tested. 
Although Bismarck did not know the details of Disraeli’s maneuver, he 
was too astute not to have sensed Britain’s underlying concern. 

As George Kennan has demonstrated, 14 there was far less to this crisis 


147 



Diplomacy 


than the publicity made it seem. Bismarck had no intention of going to 
war so soon after humiliating France, though he did not object to leaving 
France with the impression that he might do so if pushed too far. Tsar 
Alexander II was not about to guarantee republican France, though he 
did not mind conveying to Bismarck that that option existed. 15 Thus, 
Disraeli was reacting to what was still a chimera. Still, the combination of 
British uneasiness, French maneuvering, and Russian ambivalence con- 
vinced Bismarck that only an active policy could stave off the coalition- 
building which would result a generation later in the Triple Entente, 
aimed at Germany. 

The second crisis was real enough. It came in the form of yet another 
Balkan crisis, which demonstrated that neither philosophical nor ideolog- 
ical bonds could hold the Three Emperors’ League together in the face 
of the underlying clash of national interests. Because it laid bare the 
conflict which would ultimately doom Bismarck’s European order and 
plunge Europe into World War I, it will be treated here in some detail. 

The Eastern Question, dormant since the Crimean War, again came 
to dominate the international agenda in the first series of convoluted 
imbroglios, which, as the century progressed, would become as stereo- 
typed as Japanese Kabuki plays. Some almost accidental event would 
trigger a crisis; Russia would make threats and Great Britain would dis- 
patch the Royal Navy. Russia would then occupy some part of the Ottoman 
Balkans to hold as hostage. Great Britain would threaten war. Negotia- 
tions would start, during which Russia would reduce its demands, at 
which precise point the whole thing would blow up. 

In 1876, the Bulgarians, who for centuries had lived under Turkish 
rule, rebelled and were joined by other Balkan peoples. Turkey re- 
sponded with appalling brutality, and Russia, swept up by Pan-Slavic senti- 
ments, threatened to intervene. 

In London, Russia’s response raised the all-too-familiar specter of Rus- 
sian control of the Straits. Ever since Canning, British statesmen had 
observed the maxim that, if Russia controlled the Straits, it would domi- 
nate the Eastern Mediterranean and the Near East, thereby threatening 
Great Britain’s position in Egypt. Therefore, according to British conven- 
tional wisdom, the Ottoman Empire, decrepit and inhuman as it was, had 
to be preserved even at the risk of war with Russia. 

This state of affairs presented Bismarck with a grave dilemma. A Russian 
advance capable of provoking a British military reaction was also likely to 
rouse Austria to enter the fray. And if Germany was forced to choose 
between Austria and Russia, Bismarck’s foreign policy would be wrecked 
along with the Three Emperors’ League. Whatever happened, Bismarck 


148 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


faced the risk of antagonizing either Austria or Russia, and of quite possi- 
bly incurring the wrath of all the parties if he adopted a neutral attitude. 
“We have always avoided,” Bismarck said before the Reichstag in 1878, “in 
the case of differences of opinion between Austria and Russia, building a 
majority of two against one by taking the side of one of [the] parties — ” 16 
The moderation was classical Bismarck, though it also defined a mount- 
ing dilemma as the crisis unfolded. Bismarck’s first move was to attempt 
to tighten the bonds of the Three Emperors’ League by seeking to develop 
a common position. In early 1876, the Three Emperors’ League drew up 
the so-called Berlin Memorandum warning Turkey against continuing its 
repression. It seemed to imply that, with certain provisos, Russia might 
intervene in the Balkans on behalf of the Concert of Europe, much as 
Metternich’s Congresses of Verona, Laibach, and Troppau had designated 
some European power to carry out their decisions. 

But there was one enormous difference between taking such action 
then and doing so now. In Metternich’s day, Castlereagh was the British 
Foreign Secretary and had been sympathetic to intervention by the Holy 
Alliance, even though Great Britain had refused to participate in it. But 
now Disraeli was the Prime Minister, and he interpreted the Berlin Mem- 
orandum as the first step toward dismantling the Ottoman Empire to the 
exclusion of Great Britain. This was too close to the European hegemony 
Great Britain had been opposing for centuries. Complaining to Shuvalov, 
the Russian Ambassador to London, Disraeli said: “England has been 
treated as though we were Montenegro or Bosnia.” 17 To his frequent 
correspondent Lady Bradford, he wrote: 

There is no balance and unless we go out of our way to act with the 
three Northern Powers, they can act without us which is not agreeable 
for a state like England. 18 

Given the unity being displayed by St. Petersburg, Berlin, and Vienna, it 
would have been exceedingly difficult for Great Britain to resist whatever 
they might agree upon. It appeared that Disraeli had no choice but to 
join the Northern Courts while Russia assaulted Turkey. 

However, in the tradition of Palmerston, Disraeli decided to flex British 
muscles. He moved the Royal Navy to the Eastern Mediterranean and 
proclaimed his pro-Turkish sentiments — guaranteeing that Turkey would 
prove obdurate, and forcing whatever latent differences existed in the 
Three Emperors’ League into the open. Never known for excessive mod- 
esty, Disraeli declared to Queen Victoria that he had broken the Three 
Emperors’ League. It was, he believed, “virtually extinct, as extinct as the 
Roman triumvirate.” 19 


149 



Diplomacy 


Benjamin Disraeli was one of the strangest and most extraordinary 
figures ever to head a British government. Upon learning that he would 
be named Prime Minister in 1868, he exulted: “Hurray! Hurray! I’ve 
climbed to the top of the greasy pole!” By contrast, when Disraeli’s per- 
manent adversary, William Ewart Gladstone, was invited to succeed him 
that same year, the former penned a prolix reflection on the responsibili- 
ties of power and his sacred duties to God, which included the prayer 
that the Almighty imbue him with the fortitude required to carry out the 
grave responsibilities of the prime minister’s office. 

The pronouncements of the two great men who dominated British 
politics in the second half of the nineteenth century capture their antipo- 
dal natures: Disraeli — meretricious, brilliant, and mercurial; Gladstone — 
learned, pious, and grave. It was no small irony that the Victorian Tory 
Party, composed of country squires and devoutly Anglican aristocratic 
families, should have produced as its leader this brilliant Jewish adven- 
turer, and that the party of quintessential insiders should have brought to 
the forefront of the world’s stage the quintessential outsider. No Jew had 
ever risen to such heights in British politics. A century later, it would 
again be the seemingly hidebound Tories rather than the self-consciously 
progressive Labour Party that would bring Margaret Thatcher into office 
— a greengrocer’s daughter who proved to be another remarkable leader 
and Great Britain’s first female prime minister. 

Disraeli’s had been an unlikely career. A novelist as a young man, he 
was more a member of the literati than a policymaker, and was much 
more likely to have concluded his life as a scintillating writer and conver- 
sationalist than as one of the seminal British political figures of the nine- 
teenth century. Like Bismarck, Disraeli believed in expanding the vote to 
the common man, convinced that the middle classes in England would 
vote Conservative. 

As Tory leader, Disraeli articulated a new form of imperialism different 
from the essentially commercial expansion Great Britain had practiced 
since the seventeenth century — by which, it was said, it had built an 
empire in a fit of absent-mindedness. For Disraeli, the Empire was not an 
economic necessity but a spiritual one, and a prerequisite to his country’s 
greatness. “The issue is not a mean one,” he proclaimed in his famous 
1872 Crystal Palace speech. “It is whether you will be content to be a 
comfortable England, modeled and molded upon Continental principles 
and meeting in due course an inevitable fate, or whether you will be a 
great country — an Imperial country — a country where your sons, when 
they rise, rise to paramount positions, and obtain not merely the esteem 
of their countrymen, but command the respect of the world.” 20 


150 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


Adhering to convictions such as these, Disraeli was bound to oppose 
Russia’s threat to the Ottoman Empire. In the name of the European 
equilibrium, he would not accept the prescriptions of the Three Emper- 
ors’ League, and in the name of the British Empire, he would oppose 
Russia as the enforcer of a European consensus on the approaches to 
Constantinople. For, in the course of the nineteenth century, the notion 
that Russia was the principal threat to Great Britain’s position in the 
world had taken firm hold. Great Britain perceived its overseas interests 
menaced by a Russian pincer movement, one prong of which was aimed 
at Constantinople and the other at India via Central Asia. In the course of 
its expansion across Central Asia during the second half of the nineteenth 
century, Russia had elaborated methods of conquest which would be- 
come stereotyped. The victim was always so far from the center of world 
affairs that few Westerners had any precise idea of what was taking place. 
They could thus fall back on their preconceptions that the tsar was in fact 
benevolent and his subordinates were bellicose, turning distance and 
confusion into tools of Russian diplomacy. 

Of the European Powers, only Great Britain concerned itself with Cen- 
tral Asia. As Russian expansion pushed ever southward in the direction of 
India, London’s protests were stonewalled by Chancellor Prince Alek- 
sandr Gorchakov, who often did not know what the Russian armies were 
doing. Lord Augustus Loftus, the British Ambassador in St. Petersburg, 
speculated that Russia’s pressure on India “had not originated with the 
Sovereign, although he is an absolute monarch, but rather from the domi- 
nant part played by the military administration. Where an enormous 
standing army is maintained, it is absolutely necessary to find employ- 
ment for it. . . . When a system of conquest sets in, as in Central Asia, one 
acquisition of territory leads to another, and the difficulty is where to 
stop.” 21 This observation, of course, practically replicated Gorchakov’s 
own words (see page 141, above). On the other hand, the British Cabinet 
did not much care whether Russia was threatening India by momentum 
or out of deliberate imperialism. 

The same pattern was repeated again and again. Each year, Russian 
troops would penetrate deeper into the heart of Central Asia. Great Brit- 
ain would ask for an explanation and receive all kinds of assurances that 
the Tsar did not intend to annex one square meter of land. At first, such 
soothing words were able to put matters to rest. But, inevitably, another 
Russian advance would reopen the issue. For instance, after the Russian 
army occupied Samarkand (in present-day Uzbekistan) in May 1868, Gor- 
chakov told the British Ambassador, Sir Andrew Buchanan, “that the Rus- 
sian Government not only did not wish, but that they deeply regretted, 


151 



Diplomacy 


the occupation of that city, and he was assured that it would not be 
permanently retained.” 22 Samarkand, of course, remained under Russian 
sovereignty until the collapse of the Soviet Union more than a century 
later. 

In 1872, the same charade was repeated a few hundred miles to the 
southeast with respect to the principality of Khiva on the border of pres- 
ent-day Afghanistan. Count Shuvalov, the Tsar’s aide-de-camp, was sent to 
London to reassure the British that Russia had no intention of annexing 
additional territory in Central Asia: 

Not only was it far from the intention of the Emperor to take possession 
of Khiva, but positive orders had been prepared to prevent it, and 
directions given that conditions imposed should be such as could not 
in any way lead to a prolonged occupation of Khiva . 23 

These assurances had hardly been uttered when word arrived that Rus- 
sian General Kaufmann had crushed Khiva and imposed a treaty which 
was the dramatic opposite of Shuvalov’s assertions. 

In 1875, these methods were applied to Kokand, another principality 
on the border of Afghanistan. On this occasion, Chancellor Gorchakov 
felt some need to justify the gap between Russia’s assurances and its 
actions. Ingeniously, he devised an unprecedented distinction between 
unilateral assurances (which, according to his definition, had no binding 
force) and formal, bilateral engagements. “The Cabinet in London,” he 
wrote in a note, “appears to derive, from the fact of our having on several 
occasions spontaneously and amicably communicated to them our views 
with respect to Central Asia, and particularly our firm resolve not to 
pursue a policy of conquest or annexation, a conviction that we have 
contracted definite engagements toward them in regard to this matter.” 24 
In other words, Russia would insist on a free hand in Central Asia, would 
set its own limits, and not be bound even by its own assurances. 

Disraeli was not about to permit a replay of these methods at the 
approaches to Constantinople. He encouraged the Ottoman Turks to re- 
ject the Berlin Memorandum and to continue their depredations in the 
Balkans. Despite this show of British firmness, Disraeli was under severe 
domestic pressure. The Turks’ atrocities had turned British public opin- 
ion against them, and Gladstone was railing against the amorality of Dis- 
raeli’s foreign policy. Disraeli thus felt obliged to accede to the London 
Protocol of 1877, in which he joined the three Northern courts in calling 
on Turkey to end the slaughter in the Balkans and to reform its adminis- 
tration in the region. The Sultan, however, convinced that Disraeli was 


152 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


on his side no matter what formal demands were made, rejected even 
this document. Russia’s response was a declaration of war. 

For a moment, it appeared as if Russia had won the diplomatic game. 
Not only was it backed by the other two Northern courts, but by France 
as well, in addition to having a good deal of support in British public 
opinion. Disraeli’s hands were tied; going to war on behalf of Turkey 
might well bring down his government. 

But, as in many previous crises, the Russian leaders overplayed their 
hand. Led by the brilliant but reckless general and diplomat Nicholas 
Ignatyev, Russian troops arrived at the gates of Constantinople. Austria 
began to reconsider its backing of the Russian campaign. Disraeli moved 
British warships into the Dardanelles. At that point, Ignatyev shocked all 
of Europe by announcing the terms of the Treaty of San Stefano, which 
would emasculate Turkey and create a “Big Bulgaria.” Extending to the 
Mediterranean Sea, this enlarged state, it was widely assumed, would be 
dominated by Russia. 

Since 1815, conventional wisdom in Europe had deemed that the fate 
of the Ottoman Empire could only be resolved by the Concert of Europe 
as a whole and not by any one power, least of all by Russia. Ignatyev’s 
Treaty of San Stefano raised the possibilities of Russian control of the 
Straits, which was intolerable to Great Britain, and Russian control of the 
Balkan Slavs, which was intolerable to Austria. Both Great Britain and 
Austria-Hungary, therefore, declared that the Treaty was unacceptable. 

Suddenly, Disraeli no longer stood alone. To Russia’s leaders, his 
moves signaled the ominous portent of a return of the Crimean War 
coalition. When Foreign Secretary Lord Salisbury issued his famous Mem- 
orandum of April 1878 outlining why the Treaty of San Stefano had to be 
revised, even Shuvalov, the Russian Ambassador to London and a long- 
time rival of Ignatyev, agreed. Great Britain threatened war if Russia 
moved into Constantinople, while Austria threatened war over the divi- 
sion of the spoils in the Balkans. 

Bismarck’s cherished Three Emperors’ League teetered on the verge 
of collapse. Until this moment, Bismarck had been extraordinarily cir- 
cumspect. In August 1876, a year before Russian armies moved on Turkey 
“for the cause of Orthodoxy and Slavdom,” Gorchakov had proposed to 
Bismarck that the Germans host a congress to settle the Balkan crisis. 
Whereas Metternich or Napoleon III would have jumped at the opportu- 
nity to play chief mediator of the Concert of Europe, Bismarck demurred, 
believing that a congress could only make the differences within the 
Three Emperors’ League explicit. He confided privately that all the partici- 
pants, including Great Britain, would emerge from such a congress “ill- 


153 



Diplomacy 


disposed towards us because not one of them would receive from us the 
support which he expected.” 25 Bismarck also thought it unwise to bring 
Disraeli and Gorchakov together — “ministers of equally dangerous van- 
ity,” was how he described them. 

Nevertheless, as it increasingly appeared that the Balkans would be- 
come the fuse to set off a general European war, Bismarck reluctantly 
organized a congress in Berlin, the only capital to which the Russian 
leaders were willing to come. Yet he preferred to keep his distance from 
the day-to-day diplomacy, prevailing upon Austro-Hungarian Foreign Min- 
ister Andrassy to send out the invitations. 

The Congress was scheduled to assemble on June 13, 1878. Before it 
met, however, Great Britain and Russia had already settled the key issues 
in an agreement between Lord Salisbury and the new Russian Foreign 
Minister, Shuvalov, signed on May 30. The “Big Bulgaria” created by the 
Treaty of San Stefano was replaced by three new entities: a much-reduced, 
independent state of Bulgaria; the state of Eastern Rumelia, an autono- 
mous entity that was technically under a Turkish governor but whose 
administration would be overseen by a European Commission (a forerun- 
ner of United Nations peacekeeping projects of the twentieth century); 
the rest of Bulgaria reverted to Turkish rule. Russia’s gains in Armenia 
were reduced. In separate secret agreements, Great Britain promised 
Austria that it would support Austria’s occupation of Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
and assured the Sultan that it would guarantee Asiatic Turkey. In return, 
the Sultan gave England the use of Cyprus as a naval base. 

By the time the Congress of Berlin met, the danger of war which had 
induced Bismarck to agree to host the gathering had largely dissipated. 
The main function of the Congress was to give Europe’s blessing to what 
had already been negotiated. One wonders whether Bismarck would 
have risked placing himself in the inherently precarious role of mediator 
had he been able to foresee this outcome. Of course, it is likely that the 
very imminence of a congress had caused Russia and England to settle 
separately and rapidly, not wishing to expose to the vagaries of a Euro- 
pean congress gains which were far more attainable from each other in 
direct negotiations. 

Working out the details of an already concluded agreement is not 
exactly heroic work. All the major countries except Great Britain were 
represented by their foreign ministers. For the first time in British history, 
both a prime minister and a foreign minister attended an international 
congress outside the British Isles because Disraeli did not want to dele- 
gate the already largely assured prospect of a major diplomatic achieve- 
ment to Salisbury. The vain and aged Gorchakov, who had negotiated 


154 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


with Metternich at the Congresses of Laibach and Verona more than half 
a century before, chose the Congress of Berlin for his final appearance 
on the international stage. “I do not wish to be extinguished like a lamp 
that is smoking. I want to sink down as though I were a star,” he declared 
upon his arrival in Berlin . 26 

When asked to reflect on the center of gravity at the Congress, Bismarck 
pointed to Disraeli: "Der alte Jude, das ist derMann” (The old Jew, he is 
the man ). 27 Though their backgrounds could not have been more differ- 
ent, these two men came to admire each other. Both subscribed to Real- 
politik and hated what they considered moralistic cant. The religious 
overtones of Gladstone’s pronouncements (a man both Disraeli and Bis- 
marck detested) seemed pure humbug to them. Neither Bismarck nor 
Disraeli had any sympathy for the Balkan Slavs, whom they viewed as 
chronic and violent troublemakers. Both men were given to biting, cyni- 
cal quips, broad generalizations, and sarcastic barbs. Bored with nettle- 
some detail, Bismarck and Disraeli preferred to approach policy in bold, 
dramatic strokes. 

It can be argued that Disraeli was the only statesman who ever got the 
better of Bismarck. Disraeli arrived at the Congress in the impregnable 
position of having already achieved his aims — a position which Castle- 
reagh had enjoyed at Vienna, and Stalin after the Second World War. The 
remaining issues concerned the details of implementing the previous 
agreement between Great Britain and Russia, and the essentially technical 
military question of whether Turkey or the new Bulgaria should control 
the Balkan passes. For Disraeli, the strategic problem at the Congress was 
to deflect from Great Britain as much as possible Russia’s frustration at 
having to relinquish some of its conquests. 

Disraeli succeeded because Bismarck’s own position was so compli- 
cated. Bismarck perceived no German interest in the Balkans, and basi- 
cally had no preference with respect to the issues at hand other than that 
war between Austria and Russia had to be avoided at nearly any cost. He 
described his role at the Congress as that of the “ehrlicher Makler” (hon- 
est broker) and introduced almost every statement at the Congress with 
the words: “L’Mlemagne, qui nest liee par aucun interet direct dans les 
affaires d’Orient ...” (Germany, which has no direct interest of any kind 
in Eastern questions . . . ). 28 

Though Bismarck understood the game being played all too well, he 
nevertheless felt like a person in a nightmare who sees danger ap- 
proaching but is unable to avoid it. When the German parliament urged 
Bismarck to take a stronger stand, he retorted that he intended to steer 
clear. Bismarck pointed out the perils of mediation by referring to an 


155 



Diplomacy 


incident in 1851 when Tsar Nicholas I had intervened between Austria 
and Prussia, in effect on Austria’s side: 

Then Tsar Nicholas played the role that [my opponent] now presumes 
to give Germany; he (Nicholas) came and said: “The first one who 
shoots, I’ll shoot,” and as a result peace was maintained. To whose 
advantage, and to whose disadvantage, that belongs to history, and I 
don’t want to discuss it here. I am simply asking, was this role that Tsar 
Nicholas played, in which he took one side, ever repaid in gratitude? 
Certainly not by us in Prussia! . . . Was Tsar Nicholas thanked by Austria? 
Three years later came the Crimean War, and I don’t need to say any- 
thing more. 29 


Nor, he might have added, did the Tsar’s intervention prevent Prussia 
from ultimately consolidating Northern Germany — the real issue in 1851. 

Bismarck played the hand he had been dealt as well as possible. His 
approach was generally to back Russia on questions concerning the east- 
ern part of the Balkans (such as the annexation of Bessarabia) and to 
support Austria on those relating to the western part (such as the occupa- 
tion of Bosnia-Herzegovina). On only one issue did he come down 
against Russia. When Disraeli threatened to leave the Congress unless 
Turkey was left in possession of the mountain passes facing Bulgaria, 
Bismarck interceded with the Tsar to overrule the Russian negotiator, 
Shuvalov. 

In this manner, Bismarck avoided the estrangement with Russia that 
had befallen Austria after the Crimean War. But he did not emerge un- 
scathed. Many leading Russians felt cheated of victory. Russia might defer 
territorial gains for the sake of legitimacy (as Alexander I did in the Greek 
rebellion in the 1820s, and Nicholas I during the revolutions of 1848), 
but Russia never relinquished an ultimate objective or accepted compro- 
mise as just. Checks to Russian expansionism generally produced sullen 
resentment. 

Thus, after the Congress of Berlin, Russia blamed its failure to achieve 
all of its aims on the Concert of Europe rather than on its own excessive 
ambition; not on Disraeli, who had organized the coalition against Russia 
and threatened war, but on Bismarck, who had managed the Congress in 
order to avoid a European war. Russia had grown accustomed to British 
opposition; but that the role of honest broker was being assumed by a 
traditional ally like Germany was treated by Pan-Slavists as an affront. The 
Russian nationalist press styled the Congress as a “European coalition 
against Russia under the leadership of Prince Bismarck,” 30 who was 


156 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


turned into a scapegoat for Russia’s failure to achieve its exorbitant 
goals. 

Shuvalov, the principal Russian negotiator at Berlin, who was therefore 
in a position to know the real state of affairs, summed up Russian jingo- 
istic attitudes in the aftermath of the Congress: 

One prefers to leave people with the mad illusion that Russia’s interests 
have been grievously damaged by the action of certain foreign powers, 
and in this way one gives sustenance to the most pernicious agitation. 
Everyone wants peace; the condition of the country urgently demands 
it, but at the same time one tries to divert to the outside world the 
effects of the discontents produced, in reality, by the mistakes of one’s 
own policies. 31 


Shuvalov, however, did not reflect Russian public opinion. Though the 
Tsar himself did not venture as far as his jingoist press or radical Pan- 
Slavists, neither was he fully reconciled to the outcome of the Congress. 
In the decades ahead, German perfidy at Berlin would become the staple 
of many a Russian policy document, including several just prior to the 
outbreak of World War I. The Three Emperors’ League, based on the unity 
of conservative monarchs, could no longer be maintained. Henceforth, if 
there was to be any cohesive force in international affairs, it would have 
to be Realpolitik itself. 

In the 1850s, Bismarck had advocated a policy which was the Continen- 
tal equivalent of England’s own policy of “splendid isolation.” He had 
urged aloofness from entanglements before throwing Prussia’s weight 
behind whichever side seemed best to serve the Prussian national interest 
at any given point. This approach avoided alliances, which limited free- 
dom of action, and above all, gave Prussia more options than any potential 
rival. During the 1870s, Bismarck sought to consolidate the unification of 
Germany by returning to the traditional alliance with Austria and Russia. 
But in the 1880s, an unprecedented situation came about. Germany was 
too strong to stand aloof, for that might unite Europe against it. Nor could 
it any longer rely on the historic, almost reflexive, support of Russia. 
Germany was a giant in need of friends. 

Bismarck solved this dilemma by completely reversing his previous 
approach to foreign policy. If he could no longer operate the balance of 
power by having fewer commitments than any potential adversary, he 
would arrange more relationships with more countries than any conceiv- 
able opponent and thereby be able to choose among many allies, as 
circumstances required. Abandoning the freedom of maneuver which 


157 



Diplomacy 


had characterized his diplomacy for the previous twenty years, Bismarck 
began to build a system of alliances deftly engineered on the one hand 
to keep Germany’s potential adversaries from coalescing and, on the 
other, to restrain the actions of Germany’s partners. In each of Bismarck’s 
sometimes contradictory coalitions, Germany was always closer to the 
various partners than any of them was to each other; hence Bismarck 
always had a veto over common action as well as an option of indepen- 
dent action. For a decade he succeeded in maintaining pacts with his 
allies’ adversaries so that he could restrain tension on all sides. 

Bismarck initiated his new policy in 1879 by making a secret alliance 
with Austria. Aware of Russia’s resentment after the Congress of Berlin, 
he now hoped to build a barrier to further Russian expansion. Unwilling, 
however, to permit Austria to use German backing to challenge Russia, 
he also secured a veto over Austrian policy in the Balkans. The warmth 
with which Salisbury greeted the Austro-German alliance — with the bibli- 
cal good “tidings of great joy” — assured Bismarck that he was not alone 
in wanting to check Russian expansionism. Salisbury no doubt hoped that 
henceforth Austria, backed by Germany, would assume Great Britain’s 
burden of resisting Russian expansion toward the Straits. Fighting battles 
for other countries’ national interest was not Bismarck’s specialty. Fie was 
especially loath to do so in the Balkans, because he felt such deep disdain 
for that region’s quarrels. “One must give these sheep-stealers plainly to 
understand,” he rumbled about the Balkans on one occasion, “that the 
European governments have no need to harness themselves to their lusts 
and their rivalries.” 32 Unfortunately for the peace of Europe, his succes- 
sors would forget these words of caution. 

Bismarck proposed to restrain Russia in the Balkans through alliance 
rather than confrontation. For his part, the Tsar was brought up short at 
the prospect of isolation. Considering Great Britain to be Russia’s chief 
adversary and France still too weak and, above all, too republican to be a 
plausible ally, the Tsar agreed to resurrect the Three Emperors’ League, 
this time on the basis of Realpolitik. 

The benefit of an alliance with his principal opponent was not immedi- 
ately apparent to the Austrian Emperor. He would have preferred a group- 
ing with Great Britain, with which he shared a common interest in 
blocking Russia’s advance toward the Straits. But Disraeli’s defeat in 1880 
and Gladstone’s advent to power had ended that prospect; Great Britain’s 
participation, even indirectly, in a pro-Turkish, anti-Russian alliance was 
no longer in the cards. 

The second Three Emperors’ League made no pretense to any moral 
concerns. Expressed in the precise conditionality of Realpolitik, it com- 
mitted its signatories to benevolent neutrality in the event that one of 


158 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


them engaged in a war with a fourth country — for instance, should En- 
gland go to war with Russia, or France with Germany. Germany was thus 
protected against a two-front war, and Russia was protected against the 
restoration of the Crimean coalition (of Great Britain, France, and Aus- 
tria), while Germany’s commitment to defend Austria against aggression 
remained intact. Responsibility for resisting Russian expansionism in the 
Balkans was shifted onto Great Britain by precluding Austria from joining 
a coalition aimed at Russia — at least on paper. By balancing partially 
offsetting alliances, Bismarck was able to achieve almost the same free- 
dom of action he had enjoyed in his previous phase of diplomatic aloof- 
ness. Above all, he had removed the incentives that might have turned a 
local crisis into a general war. 

In 1882, the year following the second Three Emperors’ League, Bis- 
marck cast his net even more widely by persuading Italy to transform 
the Dual Alliance between Austria and Germany into a Triple Alliance, 
including Italy. In general, Italy had stayed aloof from the diplomacy of 
Central Europe, but it now resented the French conquest of Tunisia, 
which had pre-empted its own designs in North Africa. Likewise, the 
shaky Italian monarchy thought that some demonstration of Great Power 
diplomacy might enable it to resist better the rising tide of republican- 
ism. For its part, Austria sought additional insurance should the Three 
Emperors’ League prove incapable of restraining Russia. In forming the 
Triple Alliance, Germany and Italy pledged mutual assistance against a 
French attack, while Italy pledged neutrality to Austria-Hungary in case 
of a war with Russia, easing Austrian worries about a two-front war. Fi- 
nally, in 1887, Bismarck encouraged his two allies, Austria and Italy, to 
conclude the so-called Mediterranean Agreements with Great Britain, by 
which the parties agreed to preserve jointly the status quo in the Mediter- 
ranean. 

Bismarck’s diplomacy had produced a series of interlocking alliances, 
partially overlapping and partially competitive, which ensured Austria 
against Russian attack, Russia against Austrian adventurism, and Germany 
against encirclement, and which drew England into resisting Russian 
expansion toward the Mediterranean. To reduce challenges to his intri- 
cate system, Bismarck did his utmost to satisfy French ambitions every- 
where except in Alsace-Lorraine. He encouraged French colonial 
expansion, in part to deflect French energies from Central Europe, but 
more to embroil France with colonial rivals, especially Great Britain. 

For over a decade, that calculation proved accurate. France and Great 
Britain nearly clashed over Egypt, France became estranged from Italy 
over Tunisia, and Great Britain continued to oppose Russia in Central 
Asia and on the approaches to Constantinople. Eager to avoid conflict 


159 



Diplomacy 


with England, Bismarck eschewed colonial expansion until the mid- 
1880s, limiting Germany’s foreign policy to the Continent, where his aims 
were to preserve the status quo. 

But, in the end, the requirements of Realpolitik became too intricate to 
sustain. With the passage of time, the conflict between Austria and Russia 
in the Balkans became unmanageable. Had the balance of power oper- 
ated in its purest form, the Balkans would have been divided into Russian 
and Austrian spheres of influence. But public opinion was already too 
inflamed for such a policy, even in the most autocratic states. Russia could 
not agree to spheres of influence which left Slavic populations to Austria, 
and Austria would not agree to strengthening what it considered Russia’s 
Slavic dependencies in the Balkans. 

Bismarck’s eighteenth-century-style Cabinet Diplomacy was becoming 
incompatible with an age of mass public opinion. The two representative 
governments of Great Britain and France responded to their public opin- 
ions as a matter of course. In France, this meant mounting pressure for 
the recovery of Alsace-Lorraine. But the most striking example of the vital 
new role of public opinion was in Great Britain, when Gladstone defeated 
Disraeli in 1880 in the only British election fought largely over foreign 
policy issues, and then reversed Disraeli’s Balkan policy. 

Gladstone, perhaps the dominant figure of British politics in the nine- 
teenth century, viewed foreign policy in much the same way as Americans 
did after Wilson. Judging foreign policy by moral instead of geopolitical 
criteria, he argued that the national aspirations of the Bulgarians were in 
fact legitimate, and that, as a fellow Christian nation, Great Britain owed 
support to Bulgaria against the Muslim Turks. The Turks should be made 
to behave, argued Gladstone, by a coalition of powers which would then 
assume responsibility for the administration of Bulgaria. Gladstone put 
forth the same concept that came to be known under President Wilson as 
“collective security”: Europe needed to act jointly, otherwise Great Britain 
should not act at all. 

It must be done, it can only be done with safety, by the united action of 
the Powers of Europe. Your power is great; but what is above all things 
essential is, that the mind and heart of Europe in this matter should be 
one. I need now only speak of the six whom we call great Powers; of 
Russia, Germany, Austria, France, England, and Italy. The union of them 
all is not only important, but almost indispensable for entire success 
and satisfaction. 33 

In 1880, Gladstone, offended by Disraeli’s emphasis on geopolitics, 
launched his landmark Midlothian Campaign, the first whistle-stop cam- 


160 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


paign in history and the first in which the issues of foreign policy were 
taken directly to the people. In his old age, Gladstone suddenly came into 
his own as a public speaker. Asserting that morality was the only basis for 
a sound foreign policy, Gladstone insisted that Christian decency and 
respect for human rights ought to be the guiding lights of British foreign 
policy, not the balance of power and the national interest. At one stop, he 
declared: 

Remember that the sanctity of life in the hill villages of Afghanistan is 
as inviolable in the eye of Almighty God as can be your own. Remember 
that He who has united you as human beings in the same flesh and 
blood has bound you by the law of mutual love . . . not limited by the 
boundaries of Christian civilization 34 


Gladstone blazed a trail which Wilson later followed when he claimed 
that there could be no distinction between the morality of the individual 
and the morality of the state. Like Wilson a generation later, he thought 
that he had detected a global trend toward peaceful change policed by 
world public opinion: 

Certain it is that a new law of nations is gradually taking hold of the 
mind, and coming to sway the practice, of the world; a law which 
recognises independence, which frowns upon aggression, which fa- 
vours the pacific, not the bloody settlement of disputes, which aims at 
permanent and not temporary adjustments; above all, which recognises, 
as a tribunal of paramount authority, the general judgement of civilised 
mankind. 35 

Every word in this paragraph could have been uttered by Wilson and the 
implication of it was certainly very similar to Wilson’s League of Nations. 
In drawing a distinction between his policy and Disraeli’s in 1879, Glad- 
stone stressed that, rather than practicing a balance of power, he would 
strive “to keep the Powers of Europe in union together. And why? Be- 
cause by keeping all in union together you neutralize and fetter and 

bind up the selfish aims of each Common action is fatal to selfish 

aims. . . .” 36 Of course, the inability to keep all of Europe together was the 
precise cause for mounting tensions. No cause was foreseeable — cer- 
tainly not the future of Bulgaria — that could heal the breach between 
France and Germany, or between Austria and Russia. 

No British prime minister before Gladstone had used such rhetoric. 
Castlereagh had treated the Concert of Europe as an instrument for en- 
forcing the Vienna settlement. Palmerston saw it as a tool for preserving 


161 



Diplomacy 


the balance of power. Far from viewing the Concert of Europe as an 
enforcer of the status quo, Gladstone assigned it the revolutionary role 
of bringing about an entirely new world order. These ideas were to 
remain dormant until Wilson appeared on the scene a generation later. 

To Bismarck, such views were pure anathema. It is not surprising that 
these two titanic figures cordially detested each other. Bismarck’s attitude 
toward Gladstone paralleled that of Theodore Roosevelt toward Wilson: 
he considered the great Victorian part humbug, part menace. Writing to 
the German Emperor in 1883, the Iron Chancellor noted.- 

Our task would be easier if in England that race of great statesmen of 
earlier times who had an understanding of European politics, had not 
completely died out. With such an incapable politician as Gladstone, 
who is nothing but a great orator, it is impossible to pursue a policy in 
which England’s position can be counted upon . 37 

Gladstone’s view of his adversary was far more direct, for instance, when 
he called Bismarck “the incarnation of evil.” 38 

Gladstone’s ideas on foreign policy suffered the same fate as Wilson’s, 
in that they stirred his compatriots to withdrawal from global affairs rather 
than greater participation. On the level of day-to-day diplomacy, Glad- 
stone’s coming to power in 1880 made little difference to Great Britain’s 
imperial policy in Egypt and east of Suez. But it did keep England from 
being a factor in the Balkans and in the European equilibrium in general. 

Gladstone’s second tenure in office (1880-85) thus had the paradoxical 
effect of removing the safety net under Bismarck, the most moderate of 
the Continental statesmen, just as Canning’s withdrawal from Europe had 
driven Metternich toward the Tsar. As long as the Palmerston/Disraeli 
view dominated British foreign policy, Great Britain could serve as the 
last resort whenever Russia went too far in the Balkans or on the ap- 
proaches to Constantinople. With Gladstone, this assurance came to an 
end, making Bismarck ever more dependent on his increasingly anachro- 
nistic triangle with Austria and Russia. 

The Eastern Courts — heretofore the bulwark of conservatism — in a 
way proved even more susceptible to nationalistic public opinion than 
the representative governments. Germany’s domestic structure had been 
designed by Bismarck to permit him to apply to it the maxims of his 
balance-of-power diplomacy, yet it also had a strong tendency to invite 
demagoguery. Despite the fact that the Reichstag was elected by what was 
the widest suffrage in Europe, German governments were appointed by 
the emperor and reported to him, not to the Reichstag. 


162 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


Thus deprived of responsibility, Reichstag members were at liberty to 
indulge in the most extreme rhetoric. The fact that the military budget 
was voted for periods of five years at a time tempted governments to 
create crises during the crucial year in which the defense program would 
be voted. Given enough time, this arrangement might well have evolved 
into a constitutional monarchy with a government responsible to Parlia- 
ment. But during the crucial, formative years of the new Germany, gov- 
ernments were highly susceptible to nationalist propaganda and too 
prone to inventing foreign dangers to rally their constituencies. 

Russian foreign policy, too, suffered from the rabid propaganda of the 
Pan-Slavs, whose basic themes were a call for an aggressive policy in the 
Balkans and a showdown with Germany. A Russian official explained to 
the Austrian ambassador toward the end of the reign of Alexander II, in 
1879: 

People here are simply afraid of the nationalistic press — It is the flag 
of nationalism they have pinned upon themselves that protects them 
and assures them of powerful support. Ever since the nationalistic ten- 
dency has come so prominently to the fore, and particularly since it 
succeeded in prevailing against all better advice, in the question of 
going to war [against Turkey], the so-called “national” party . . . has be- 
come a real power, especially because it embraces the entire army. 39 

Austria, the other polyglot empire, was in a similar position. 

In these circumstances, it became increasingly difficult for Bismarck to 
execute his precarious balancing act. In 1881, a new tsar, Alexander III, 
came to the throne in St. Petersburg, unrestrained by conservative ideol- 
ogy like his grandfather, Nicholas I, or by personal affection for the aged 
German Emperor, like his father, Alexander II. Indolent and autocratic, 
Alexander III distrusted Bismarck, in part because Bismarck’s policy was 
too complicated for him to understand. On one occasion he even said 
that, whenever he saw any mention of Bismarck in a dispatch, he placed 
a cross next to his name. The Tsar’s suspicions were reinforced by 
his Danish wife, who could not forgive Bismarck for taking Schleswig- 
Holstein from her native country. 

The Bulgarian crisis of 1885 brought all these impulses to a head. 
Another revolt produced the greater Bulgaria which Russia had sought so 
passionately a decade earlier, and which Great Britain and Austria had 
feared. Demonstrating how history can falsify the most firmly held expec- 
tations, the new Bulgaria, far from being dominated by Russia, was unified 
under a German prince. The court at St. Petersburg blamed Bismarck for 


163 



Diplomacy 


what the German chancellor in fact would have far preferred to avoid. 
The Russian court was outraged and the Pan-Slavs, who saw a conspiracy 
in every corner west of the Vistula, spread the rumor that Bismarck was 
behind a diabolical anti-Russian plot. In this atmosphere, Alexander re- 
fused to renew the Three Emperors’ League in 1887. 

Bismarck, however, was not ready to give up on his Russian option. He 
knew that, left to its own devices, Russia would sooner or later drift into 
an alliance with France. Yet in the conditions of the 1880s, with Russia 
and Great Britain permanently on the verge of war, such a course in- 
creased Russia’s peril vis-a-vis Germany without diminishing British an- 
tagonism. Moreover, Germany still had a British option, especially now 
that Gladstone had left office. Alexander, in any event, had good reason 
to doubt that France would run the risk of war over the Balkans. In 
other words, Russo-German ties still reflected a very real, if diminishing, 
convergence of national interests and not simply Bismarck’s predilections 
— though, without his diplomatic skill, these common interests would 
not have found formal expression. 

Ever ingenious, Bismarck now came up with his last major initiative, 
the so-called Reinsurance Treaty. Germany and Russia promised each 
other to stay neutral in a war with a third country unless Germany at- 
tacked France, or Russia attacked Austria. Theoretically, Russia and Ger- 
many were now guaranteed against a two-front war, provided they stayed 
on the defensive. However, much depended on how the aggressor was 
defined, especially since mobilization was becoming increasingly equated 
with a declaration of war (see chapter 8). Since that question was never 
posed, there were obvious limits to the Reinsurance Treaty, the utility of 
which was further impaired by the Tsar’s insistence on keeping it secret. 

The secrecy of the agreement was the clearest illustration of the conflict 
between the requirements of cabinet diplomacy and the imperatives of 
an increasingly democratized foreign policy. Matters had become so com- 
plex that two levels of secrecy existed within the secret Reinsurance 
Treaty. The second level was a particularly confidential codicil in which 
Bismarck promised not to stand in the way of Russia’s attempt to acquire 
Constantinople, and to help increase Russian influence in Bulgaria. Nei- 
ther assurance would have gladdened Germany’s ally, Austria, not to 
speak of Great Britain — though Bismarck would hardly have been un- 
happy had Great Britain and Russia become embroiled over the future of 
the Straits. 

Despite its complexities, the Reinsurance Treaty maintained the in- 
dispensable link between St. Petersburg and Berlin. And it reassured 
St. Petersburg that, though Germany would defend the integrity of the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, it would not assist in its expansion at Russia’s 


164 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


expense. Germany thus achieved at least a delay in a Franco-Russian 
alliance. 

That Bismarck had put his intricate foreign policy into the service of 
restraint and the preservation of peace was shown by his reaction to 
pressure from German military leaders urging a pre-emptive war against 
Russia when the Three Emperors’ League ended in 1887. Bismarck 
doused all such speculations in a speech to the Reichstag in which he 
tried to give St. Petersburg a reputation to uphold as a way of discourag- 
ing a Franco-Russian alliance: 

Peace with Russia will not be disturbed from our side; and I do not 
believe Russia will attack us. I also do not believe that the Russians are 
looking around for alliances in order to attack us in company with 
others, or that they would be inclined to take advantages of difficulties 
that we might encounter on another side, in order to attack us with 
ease. 40 


Nevertheless, for all its dexterity and moderation, Bismarck’s balancing 
act was due to end soon. The maneuvers were becoming too complex to 
sustain, even for the master. Overlapping alliances designed to ensure 
restraint led to suspicion instead, while the growing importance of public 
opinion reduced everyone’s flexibility. 

However skillful Bismarck’s diplomacy, the need for so high a degree 
of manipulation was proof of the strains which a powerful, unified Ger- 
many had placed on the European balance of power. Even while Bis- 
marck was still at the helm, imperial Germany inspired disquiet. Indeed, 
Bismarck’s machinations, which were intended to provide reassurance, 
over time had an oddly unsettling effect, partly because his contemporar- 
ies had such difficulty comprehending their increasingly convoluted na- 
ture. Fearful of being outmaneuvered, they tended to hedge their bets. 
But this course of action also limited flexibility, the mainspring of Real- 
politik as a substitute for conflict. 

Though Bismarck’s style of diplomacy was probably doomed by the 
end of his period in office, it was far from inevitable that it should have 
been replaced by a mindless armaments race and rigid alliances more 
comparable to the later Cold War than to a traditional balance of power. 
For nearly twenty years, Bismarck preserved the peace and eased interna- 
tional tension with his moderation and flexibility. But he paid the price 
of misunderstood greatness, for his successors and would-be imitators 
could draw no better lesson from his example than multiplying arms and 
waging a war which would cause the suicide of European civilization. 

By 1890, the concept of the balance of power had reached the end of 


165 



Diplomacy 


its potential. It had been made necessary in the first place by the multi- 
tude of states emerging from the ashes of medieval aspirations to univer- 
sal empire. In the eighteenth century, its corollary of raison d’etat had 
led to frequent wars whose primary function was to prevent the emer- 
gence of a dominant power and the resurrection of a European empire. 
The balance of power had preserved the liberties of states, not the peace 
of Europe. 

Balance-of-power policy reached its zenith in the forty years after the 
Napoleonic Wars. It operated smoothly during this period because the 
equilibrium had been deliberately designed to enhance balance, and, as 
importantly, because it was buttressed by a sense of shared values, at least 
among the conservative courts. After the Crimean War, that sense of 
shared values gradually eroded, and matters reverted to eighteenth- 
century conditions, now made all the more dangerous by modern tech- 
nology and the growing role of public opinion. Even the despotic states 
could appeal to their publics by invoking a foreign danger— and by sub- 
stituting outside threats for democratic consensus. National consolidation 
of the states of Europe reduced the number of players and the ability to 
substitute diplomatic combinations for the deployment of power, while 
the collapse of a shared sense of legitimacy eroded moral restraint. 

Despite America’s historic aversion to the balance of power, these 
lessons are relevant to post-Cold War American foreign policy. For the 
first time in its history, America is currently part of an international system 
in which it is the strongest country. Though a military superpower, 
America can no longer impose its will because neither its power nor its 
ideology lends itself to imperial ambitions. And nuclear weapons, in 
which America is preponderant militarily, tend toward an equalization of 
usable power. 

The United States therefore finds itself increasingly in a world with 
numerous similarities to nineteenth-century Europe, albeit on a global 
scale. One can hope that something akin to the Metternich system evolves, 
in which a balance of power is reinforced by a shared sense of values. 
And in the modern age, these values would have to be democratic. 

Yet Metternich had not had to create his legitimate order; it essentially 
already existed. In the contemporary world, democracy is far from univer- 
sal, and where it is proclaimed it is not necessarily defined in commensu- 
rable terms. It is reasonable for the United States to try to buttress 
equilibrium with moral consensus. To be true to itself, America must try 
to forge the widest possible moral consensus around a global commit- 
ment to democracy. But it dare not neglect the analysis of the balance of 
power. For the quest for moral consensus becomes self-defeating when 
it destroys the equilibrium. 


166 



Realpolitik Turns on Itself 


If a Metternich-type system based on legitimacy is not possible, America 
will have to learn to operate in a balance-of-power system, however 
uncongenial it may find such a course. In the nineteenth century, there 
were two models for balance-of-power systems: the British model exem- 
plified by the Palmerston/Disraeli approach; and Bismarck’s model. The 
British approach was to wait for the balance of power to be threatened 
directly before engaging itself, and then almost always on the weaker 
side; Bismarck’s approach sought to prevent challenges from arising by 
establishing close relations with as many parties as possible, by building 
overlapping alliance systems, and by using the resulting influence to 
moderate the claims of the contenders. 

Strange as it may seem in light of America’s experiences with Germany 
in the course of two world wars, the Bismarck style of operating a balance 
of power is probably more attuned to the traditional American approach 
to international relations. The Palmerston/Disraeli method would require 
a disciplined aloofness from disputes and a ruthless commitment to the 
equilibrium in the face of threats. Both the disputes and the threats would 
have to be assessed almost entirely in terms of balance of power. America 
would find it quite difficult to marshal either the aloofness or the ruth- 
lessness, not to mention the willingness to interpret international affairs 
strictly in terms of power. 

Bismarck’s later policy sought to restrain power in advance by some 
consensus on shared objectives with various groups of countries. In an 
interdependent world, America will find it difficult to practice Great Brit- 
ain’s splendid isolation. But it is also unlikely that it will be able to 
establish a comprehensive system of security equally applicable to all 
parts of the world. The most likely — and constructive — solution would 
be partially overlapping alliance systems, some focusing on security, oth- 
ers on economic relations. The challenge for America will be to generate 
objectives growing out of American values that can hold together these 
various groupings (see chapter 31). 

In any event, by the end of the nineteenth century, both of these 
approaches to foreign policy were fading. Great Britain no longer felt 
predominant enough to risk isolation. And Bismarck was dismissed from 
office by an impatient new emperor who set himself the immodest task 
of improving on the policy of the master. In the process, the balance of 
power turned rigid, and Europe headed toward a catastrophe all the 
more devastating because nobody believed it was possible. 


167 



CHAPTER SEVEN 


A Political Doomsday Machine: 
European Diplomacy Before 
the First World War 


By the end of the twentieth century’s first decade, the Concert of Eu- 
rope, which had maintained peace for a century, had for all practical 
purposes ceased to exist. The Great Powers had thrown themselves with 
blind frivolity into a bipolar struggle that led to petrification into two 
power blocs, anticipating the pattern of the Cold War fifty years later. 
There was one important difference, however. In the age of nuclear 
weapons, the avoidance of war would be a major, perhaps the principal, 
foreign policy goal. At the beginning of the twentieth century, wars could 
still be started with a touch of frivolity. Indeed, some European thinkers 
held that periodic bloodletting was cathartic, a naive hypothesis that was 
brutally punctured by the First World War. 

For decades, historians have been debating who must bear responsibil- 
ity for the outbreak of the First World War. Yet no one country can be 
singled out for that mad dash to disaster. Each of the major powers 
contributed its quota of shortsightedness and irresponsibility, and did so 


168 


A Political Doomsday Machine 


with an insouciance which would never again be possible once the disas- 
ter they had wrought entered the collective memory of Europe. They had 
forgotten Pascal’s warning in Pensees — if they had ever known it — “We 
run heedlessly into the abyss after putting something in front of us to 
stop us seeing it.” 

There was surely enough blame to go around. The nations of Europe 
transformed the balance of power into an armaments race without under- 
standing that modern technology and mass conscription had made gen- 
eral war the greatest threat to their security, and to European civilization 
as a whole. Though all the nations of Europe contributed to the disaster 
with their policies, it was Germany and Russia which undermined any 
sense of restraint by their very natures. 

Throughout the process of German unification, there had been little 
concern about its impact on the balance of power. For 200 years, Ger- 
many had been the victim, not the instigator, of the wars of Europe. In 
the Thirty Years’ War, the Germans had suffered casualties estimated as 
high as 30 percent of their entire population, and all the decisive battles 
of the dynastic wars of the eighteenth century and of the Napoleonic Wars 
were fought on German soil. 

It was therefore nearly inevitable that a united Germany would aim to 
prevent the recurrence of these tragedies. But it was not inevitable that 
the new German state should have approached this challenge largely as a 
military problem, or that German diplomats after Bismarck should have 
conducted foreign policy with such bullying assertiveness. Whereas Fred- 
erick the Great’s Prussia had been the weakest of the Great Powers, 
soon after unification, Germany became the strongest and as such proved 
disquieting to its neighbors. In order to participate in the Concert of 
Europe, it therefore needed to show special restraint in its foreign policy. 1 
Unfortunately, after Bismarck’s departure, moderation was the quality 
Germany lacked the most. 

The reason German statesmen were obsessed with naked power was 
that, in contrast to other nation-states, Germany did not possess any integ- 
rating philosophical framework. None of the ideals which had shaped the 
modern nation-state in the rest of Europe was present in Bismarck’s 
construction — not Great Britain’s emphasis on traditional liberties, the 
French Revolution’s appeal to universal freedom, or even the benign 
universalist imperialism of Austria. Strictly speaking, Bismarck’s Germany 
did not embody the aspirations of a nation-state at all, because he had 
deliberately excluded the Austrian Germans. Bismarck’s Reich was an 
artifice, being foremost a greater Prussia whose principal purpose was to 
increase its own power. 


169 



Diplomacy 


The absence of intellectual roots was a principal cause of the aimless- 
ness of German foreign policy. The memory of having served for so 
long as Europe’s main battlefield had produced a deep-seated sense of 
insecurity in the German people. Though Bismarck’s empire was now 
the strongest power on the Continent, German leaders always felt vaguely 
threatened, as was evidenced by their obsession with military prepared- 
ness compounded by bellicose rhetoric. German military planners always 
thought in terms of fighting off a combination of all of Germany’s neigh- 
bors simultaneously. In readying themselves for that worst-case scenario, 
they helped to make it a reality. For a Germany strong enough to defeat 
a coalition of all its neighbors was obviously also more than capable of 
overwhelming any of them individually. At the sight of the military colos- 
sus on their borders, Germany’s neighbors drew together for mutual 
protection, transforming the German quest for security into an agent of 
its own insecurity. 

A wise and restrained policy might have postponed and perhaps even 
averted the looming peril. But Bismarck’s successors, abandoning his 
restraint, relied more and more on sheer strength, as expressed in one 
of their favorite pronouncements — that Germany was to serve as the 
hammer and not the anvil of European diplomacy. It was as if Germany 
had expended so much energy on achieving nationhood that it had not 
had time to think through what purpose the new state should serve. 
Imperial Germany never managed to develop a concept of its own na- 
tional interest. Swayed by the emotions of the moment and hampered by 
an extraordinary lack of sensitivity to foreign psyches, German leaders 
after Bismarck combined truculence with indecisiveness, hurling their 
country, first into isolation and then into war. 

Bismarck had taken great pains to downplay assertions of German 
power, using his intricate system of alliances to restrain his many partners 
and to keep their latent incompatibilities from erupting into war. Bis- 
marck’s successors lacked the patience and the subtlety for such complex- 
ity. When Emperor William I died in 1888, his son, Frederick (whose 
liberalism had so worried Bismarck), governed for a mere ninety-eight 
days before succumbing to throat cancer. He was succeeded by his son, 
William II, whose histrionic demeanor gave observers the uneasy sense 
that the ruler of Europe’s most powerful nation was both immature and 
erratic. Psychologists have ascribed William’s restless bullying to an at- 
tempt to compensate for having been born with a deformed arm — a 
grave blow to a member of Prussia’s royal family with its exalted military 
traditions. In 1890, the brash young Emperor dismissed Bismarck, refus- 
ing to govern in the shadow of so towering a figure. Henceforth, it was 


170 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


the Kaiser’s diplomacy which would become so central to the peace of 
Europe. Winston Churchill captured William’s essence in sardonic style: 


Just strut around and pose and rattle the undrawn sword. All he wished 
was to feel like Napoleon, and be like him without having had to fight 
his battles. Surely less than this would not pass muster. If you are the 
summit of a volcano, the least you can do is smoke. So he smoked, a 
pillar of cloud by day and the gleam of fire by night, to all who gazed 
from afar; and slowly and surely these perturbed observers gathered 
and joined themselves together for mutual protection. 

. . . but underneath all this posing and its trappings, was a very ordi- 
nary, vain, but on the whole well-meaning man, hoping to pass himself 
off as a second Frederick the Great. 2 


What the Kaiser wanted most was international recognition of Germany’s 
importance and, above all, of its power. He attempted to conduct what he 
and his entourage called Weltpolitik, or global policy, without ever defin- 
ing that term or its relationship to the German national interest. Beyond 
the slogans lay an intellectual vacuum: truculent language masked an 
inner hollowness; vast slogans obscured timidity and the lack of any sense 
of direction. Boastfulness coupled with irresolution in action reflected 
the legacy of two centuries of German provincialism. Even if German 
policy had been wise and responsible, integrating the German colossus 
into the existing international framework would have been a daunting 
task. But the explosive mix of personalities and domestic institutions 
prevented any such course, leading instead to a mindless foreign policy 
which specialized in bringing down on Germany everything it had always 
feared. 

In the twenty years after Bismarck’s dismissal, Germany managed to 
foster an extraordinary reversal of alliances. In 1898, France and Great 
Britain had been on the verge of war over Egypt. Animosity between 
Great Britain and Russia had been a constant factor of international rela- 
tions for most of the nineteenth century. At various times, Great Britain 
had been looking for allies against Russia, trying Germany before settling 
on Japan. No one would have thought that Great Britain, France, and 
Russia could possibly end up on the same side. Yet, ten years later, that 
was exactly what came to pass under the impact of insistent and threaten- 
ing German diplomacy. 

For all the complexity of his maneuvers, Bismarck had never attempted 
to go beyond the traditions of the balance of power. His successors, 
however, were clearly not comfortable with the balance of power, and 


171 



Diplomacy 


never seemed to understand that, the more they magnified their own 
strength, the more they would encourage the compensating coalitions 
and arms buildups inherent in the system of European equilibrium. 

German leaders resented the reluctance of other countries to ally 
themselves with a nation that was already the strongest in Europe, and 
whose strength was generating fears of German hegemony. Bullying tac- 
tics seemed to Germany’s leaders the best way to bring home to their 
neighbors the limits of their own strength and, presumably, the benefits 
of Germany’s friendship. This taunting approach had quite the opposite 
effect. Trying to achieve absolute security for their country, German lead- 
ers after Bismarck threatened every other European nation with absolute 
insecurity, triggering countervailing coalitions nearly automatically. There 
are no diplomatic shortcuts to domination; the only route that leads to it 
is war, a lesson the provincial leaders of post-Bismarck Germany learned 
only when it was too late to avoid a global catastrophe. 

Ironically, for the greater part of imperial Germany’s history, Russia, 
not Germany, was considered the main threat to peace. First Palmerston 
and then Disraeli were convinced that Russia intended to penetrate into 
Egypt and India. By 1913, the corresponding fear among German leaders 
that they were about to be overrun by the Russian hordes had reached 
such a pitch that it contributed significantly to their decision to force the 
fateful showdown a year later. 

In fact, there was little hard evidence to substantiate the fear that Russia 
might seek a European empire. The claims by German military intelli- 
gence of having proof that Russia was in fact preparing for such a war 
were as true as they were irrelevant. All the countries of both alliances, 
intoxicated with the new technology of railways and mobilization sched- 
ules, were constantly engaged in military preparations out of proportion 
to any of the issues being disputed. But, precisely because these fervid 
preparations could not be related to any definable objective, they were 
interpreted as portents of vast, if nebulous, ambitions. Characteristically, 
Prince von Billow, German Chancellor from 1900 to 1909, espoused Fred- 
erick the Great’s view that “of all Prussia’s neighbors the Russian Empire 
is the most dangerous in its strength as well as in its position.” 3 

Throughout, Europe found something decidedly eerie about the vast- 
ness and persistence of Russia. All the nations of Europe were seeking 
aggrandizement by means of threats and counterthreats. But Russia 
seemed impelled to expand by a rhythm all its own, containable only 
by the deployment of superior force, and usually by war. Throughout 
numerous crises, a reasonable settlement often seemed well within Rus- 
sia’s reach, much better in fact than what ultimately emerged. Yet Russia 


172 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


always preferred the risk of defeat to compromise. This had been true in 
the Crimean War of 1854, the Balkan Wars of 1875-78, and prior to the 
Russo-Japanese War of 1904. 

One explanation for these tendencies was that Russia belonged partly 
to Europe, partly to Asia. In the West, Russia was part of the Concert of 
Europe and participated in the elaborate rules of the balance of power. 
But even there, Russian leaders were generally impatient with appeals to 
the equilibrium and prone to resorting to war if their demands were not 
met — for example, in the prelude to the Crimean War of 1854, and the 
Balkan Wars, and again in 1885, when Russia nearly went to war with 
Bulgaria. In Central Asia, Russia was dealing with weak principalities to 
which the principle of the balance of power did not apply, and in Siberia 
— until it ran up against Japan — it was able to expand much as America 
had across a sparsely populated continent. 

In European forums, Russia would listen to the arguments on behalf of 
the balance of power but did not always abide by its maxims. Whereas 
the nations of Europe had always maintained that the fate of Turkey and 
the Balkans had to be settled by the Concert of Europe, Russia, on the 
other hand, invariably sought to deal with this question unilaterally and 
by force — in the Treaty of Adrianople in 1829, the Treaty of Unkiar Ske- 
lessi in 1833, the conflict with Turkey in 1853, and the Balkan Wars of 
1875-78 and 1885. Russia expected Europe to look the other way and felt 
aggrieved when it did not. The same problem would recur after the 
Second World War, when the Western allies maintained that the fate of 
Eastern Europe concerned Europe as a whole, while Stalin insisted that 
Eastern Europe, and especially Poland, were within the Soviet sphere and 
that therefore their future should be settled without reference to the 
Western democracies. And, like his tsarist predecessors, Stalin proceeded 
unilaterally. Inevitably, however, some coalition of Western forces would 
arise to resist Russia’s military thrusts and to undo Russia’s impositions 
on its neighbors. In the post-World War II period, it would take a genera- 
tion for the historic pattern to reassert itself. 

Russia on the march rarely exhibited a sense of limits. Thwarted, it 
nursed its grievances and bided its time for revenge — against Great Brit- 
ain through much of the nineteenth century, against Austria after the 
Crimean War, against Germany after the Congress of Berlin, and against 
the United States during the Cold War. It remains to be seen how the new 
post-Soviet Russia will react to the collapse of its historic empire and 
satellite orbit once it fully absorbs the shock of its disintegration. 

In Asia, Russia’s sense of mission was even less constrained by political 
or geographic obstacles. For all of the eighteenth century and most of the 


173 



Diplomacy 


nineteenth, Russia found itself alone in the Far East. It was the first Euro- 
pean power to deal with Japan, and the first to conclude an agreement 
with China. This expansion, accomplished by relatively few settlers and 
military adventurers, produced no conflict with the European powers. 
Sporadic Russian clashes with China proved no more significant. In return 
for Russian assistance against warring tribes, China conceded large areas 
of territory to Russian administration in the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries, giving rise to a series of “unequal treaties” which every Chinese 
government since then, especially the communist one, has denounced. 

Characteristically, Russia’s appetite for Asian territory seemed to grow 
with each new acquisition. In 1903, Serge Witte, the Russian Finance 
Minister and a confidant of the Tsar, wrote to Nicholas II: “Given our 
enormous frontier with China and our exceptionally favorable situation, 
the absorption by Russia of a considerable part of the Chinese Empire is 
only a question of time.” 4 As with the Ottoman Empire, Russia’s leaders 
took the position that the Far East was Russia’s own business and that the 
rest of the world had no right to intervene. Russia’s advances on all fronts 
sometimes occurred simultaneously; more often they shifted back and 
forth, depending on where expansion seemed least risky. 

Imperial Russia’s policymaking apparatus reflected the empire’s dual 
nature. Russia’s Foreign Office was a department of the Chancery, staffed 
by independent officials whose orientation was essentially toward the 
West. 5 Frequently Baltic Germans, these officials considered Russia a Eu- 
ropean state with policies which should be implemented in the context 
of the Concert of Europe. The Chancery’s role, however, was contested 
by the Asiatic Department, which was equally independent and responsi- 
ble for Russian policy toward the Ottoman Empire, the Balkans, and 
the Far East — in other words, for every front where Russia was actually 
advancing. 

Unlike the Chancery, the Asiatic Department did not consider itself a 
part of the Concert of Europe. Viewing the European nations as obstacles 
to its designs, the Asiatic Department treated the European nations as 
irrelevant and, whenever possible, sought to fulfill Russian goals through 
unilateral treaties or by wars initiated without any reference to Europe. 
Since Europe insisted that issues concerning the Balkans and the Ottoman 
Empire be settled in concert, frequent conflicts were inevitable, while 
Russia’s outrage mounted at being thus thwarted by powers it considered 
interlopers. 

Partly defensive, partly offensive, Russian expansion was always ambig- 
uous, and this ambiguity generated Western debates over Russia’s true 
intentions that lasted through the Soviet period. One reason for the pe- 


174 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


rennial difficulty in understanding Russia’s purposes was that the Russian 
government, even in the communist period, always had more in common 
with an eighteenth-century autocratic court than with a twentieth-century 
superpower. Neither imperial nor communist Russia ever produced a 
great foreign minister. Like Nesselrode, Gorchakov, Giers, Lamsdorff, and 
even Gromyko, its foreign ministers were all accomplished and able but 
lacked the authority to design long-range policy. They were little more 
than servants of a volatile and easily distracted autocrat, for whose favor 
they had to compete amidst many overriding domestic concerns. Imperial 
Russia had no Bismarck, no Salisbury, no Roosevelt — in short, no hands- 
on minister with executive powers over all aspects of foreign affairs. 

Even when the ruling tsar was a dominant personality, the autocratic 
system of Russian policymaking inhibited the evolution of a coherent 
foreign policy. Once the tsars found a foreign minister with whom they 
felt comfortable, they tended to retain him into his dotage, as was the 
case with Nesselrode, Gorchakov, and Giers. Among them, these three 
foreign ministers served for most of the nineteenth century. Even in 
their extreme old age, they proved invaluable to foreign statesmen, who 
considered them the only personalities worth seeing in St. Petersburg 
because they were the only officials with access to the tsar. Protocol 
prohibited virtually anybody else from seeking an audience with the tsar. 

To complicate decision-making further, the tsar’s executive power fre- 
quently clashed with his aristocratic notions of princely life-style. For 
example, immediately after the signing of the Reinsurance Treaty, a key 
period in Russia’s foreign affairs, Alexander III left St. Petersburg for four 
consecutive months, from July through October 1887, to go yachting, 
observe maneuvers, and visit his in-laws in Denmark. With the only real 
decision-maker thus out of reach, Russia’s foreign policy floundered. Not 
only were the tsar’s policies often driven by the emotions of the moment, 
they were greatly influenced by the nationalist agitation fanned by the 
military. Military' adventurers, like General Kaufmann in Central Asia, paid 
hardly any attention to the foreign ministers. Gorchakov was probably 
telling the truth about how little he knew of Central Asia in his conversa- 
tions with the British ambassadors described in the previous chapter. 

By the time of Nicholas II, who ruled from 1894 to 1917, Russia was 
forced to pay the price for its arbitrary institutions. Nicholas first took 
Russia into a disastrous war with Japan and then permitted his country to 
become captive to an alliance system which made war with Germany 
virtually inevitable. While Russia’s energies had been geared to expansion 
and consumed by attendant foreign conflicts, its social and political struc- 
ture had grown brittle. Defeat in the war with Japan in 1905 should 


175 



Diplomacy 


have served as a warning that the time for domestic consolidation — as 
advocated by the great reformer, Peter Stolypin — was drawing short. 
What Russia needed was a respite; what it received was another foreign 
enterprise. Thwarted in Asia, Russia reverted to its dream of Pan-Slavism 
and a push toward Constantinople, which, this time, ran out of control. 

The irony was that, after a certain point, expansionism no longer en- 
hanced Russia’s power but brought about its decline. In 1849, Russia was 
widely considered the strongest nation in Europe. Seventy years later, its 
dynasty collapsed and it temporarily disappeared from the ranks of the 
Great Powers. Between 1848 and 1914, Russia was involved in over half a 
dozen wars (other than colonial wars), far more than any other major 
power. In each of these conflicts, except for the intervention in Hungary 
in 1849, the financial and political costs to Russia far exceeded the possi- 
ble gains. Though each of these conflicts took its toll, Russia continued to 
identify Great Power status with territorial expansion; it hungered for 
more land, which it neither needed nor was able to digest. Tsar Nicholas 
II’s close adviser, Serge Witte, promised him that “from the shores of the 
Pacific and the heights of the Himalayas Russia would dominate not only 
the affairs of Asia but those of Europe as well.” 6 Economic, social, and 
political development would have been far more advantageous to Great 
Power status in the Industrial Age than a satellite in Bulgaria or a protec- 
torate in Korea. 

A few Russian leaders, such as Gorchakov, were wise enough to realize 
that, for Russia, “the extension of territory was the extension of weak- 
ness,” 7 but their views were never able to moderate the Russian mania 
for new conquests. In the end, the communist empire collapsed for es- 
sentially the same reasons that the tsars’ had. The Soviet Union would 
have been much better off had it stayed within its borders after the 
Second World War and established relations with what came to be known 
as the satellite orbit comparable to those it maintained with Finland. 

When two colossi — a powerful, impetuous Germany and a huge, re- 
lentless Russia — rub up against each other at the center of the Continent, 
conflict is probable, no matter that Germany had nothing to gain from a 
war with Russia and that Russia had everything to lose in a war with 
Germany. The peace of Europe therefore depended on the one country 
that had played the role of balancer so skillfully and with such moderation 
throughout the nineteenth century'. 

In 1890, the term “splendid isolation” still accurately described British 
foreign policy. British subjects proudly referred to their country as the 
“balance wheel” of Europe — the weight of which prevented any one of 
the various coalitions among the Continental powers from becoming 


176 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


dominant. Entanglement in these alliances was traditionally nearly as re- 
pugnant to British statesmen as it was to American isolationists. Yet only 
twenty-five years later, Englishmen would be dying by the hundreds of 
thousands on the muddy fields of Flanders as they fought at the side of a 
French ally against a German foe. 

A remarkable change occurred in British foreign policy between 1890 
and 1914. It was no small irony that the man who led Great Britain 
through the first part of this transition represented everything traditional 
about Great Britain and British foreign policy. For the Marquis of Salis- 
bury was the ultimate insider. He was the scion of the ancient Cecil family, 
whose ancestors had served as top ministers to British monarchs since 
the time of Queen Elizabeth I. King Edward VII, who reigned from 1901 
to 1910 and came from an upstart family compared with the Cecils, was 
known to complain occasionally at the condescending tone Salisbury 
used toward him. 

Salisbury’s rise in politics was as effortless as it was foreordained. Af- 
ter an education at Christ Church, Oxford, the young Salisbury toured 
Europe, perfected his French, and met heads of state. By the age of forty- 
eight, after serving as viceroy of India, he became Disraeli’s Foreign 
Minister and played a major role at the Congress of Berlin, where he did 
most of the detailed day-to-day negotiating. After Disraeli’s death, he took 
over the leadership of the Tory Party and, apart from Gladstone’s last 
government of 1892-94, was the dominant figure in British politics dur- 
ing the last fifteen years of the nineteenth century. 

In some respects, Salisbury’s position was not unlike that of President 
George Bush, though he served longer in his nation’s highest office. Both 
men bestrode a world which was receding by the time they came to 
power, though that fact was not obvious to either of them. Both left an 
impact by knowing how to operate what they had inherited. Bush’s view 
of the world was shaped by the Cold War, in which he had risen to 
prominence and over whose end he was obliged to preside while at the 
pinnacle of his career; Salisbury’s formative experiences had been in the 
Palmerston era of unparalleled British power overseas and of intractable 
Anglo-Russian rivalry, both of which were clearly coming to an end dur- 
ing his leadership. 

Salisbury’s government had to grapple with the decline in Great Brit- 
ain’s relative standing. Its vast economic power was now matched by 
Germany’s; Russia and France had expanded their imperial efforts and 
were challenging the British Empire nearly everywhere. Though Great 
Britain was still pre-eminent, the dominance it had enjoyed in the middle 
of the nineteenth century was slipping. Just as Bush adjusted skillfully to 


177 



Diplomacy 


what he had not foreseen, by the 1890s Great Britain’s leaders recognized 
the need to relate traditional policy to unexpected realities. 

Overweight and rumpled in his physical appearance, Lord Salisbury 
more adequately embodied Great Britain’s contentment with the status 
quo than he did its transformation. As the author of the phrase “splendid 
isolation,” Salisbury, on the face of it, promised to carry on the traditional 
British policies of holding a firm line overseas against other imperial 
powers, and of involving Great Britain in Continental alliances only when 
it was required as a last resort to prevent an aggressor from overturning 
the balance. For Salisbury, Great Britain’s insular position meant that its 
ideal policy was to be active on the high seas and to remain unentangled 
in the customary Continental alliances. “We are fish,” he bluntly asserted 
on one occasion. 

In the end, Salisbury was obliged to recognize that Great Britain’s 
overextended empire was straining under the pressures of Russia in the 
Far and Near East, and of France in Africa. Even Germany was entering 
the colonial race. Though France, Germany, and Russia were frequently 
in conflict with one another on the Continent, they always clashed with 
Great Britain overseas. For Great Britain possessed not only India, Can- 
ada, and a large portion of Africa, but insisted on dominating vast territor- 
ies which, for strategic reasons, it wanted to keep from falling into the 
hands of another power even though it did not seek to control them 
directly. Salisbury called this claim a “sort of ear-mark upon territory, 
which, in case of a break-up, England did not want any other power to 
have.” 8 These areas included the Persian Gulf, China, Turkey, and Mo- 
rocco. During the 1890s, Great Britain felt beleaguered by endless clashes 
with Russia in Afghanistan, around the Straits, and in Northern China, and 
with France in Egypt and Morocco. 

With the Mediterranean Agreements of 1887, Great Britain became 
indirectly associated with the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hun- 
gary, and Italy in the hope that Italy and Austria might strengthen its hand 
in dealing with France in North Africa, and with Russia in the Balkans. Yet 
the Mediterranean Agreements proved to be only a stopgap. 

The new German empire, deprived of its master strategist, did not 
know what to do with its opportunity. Geopolitical realities were gradu- 
ally drawing Great Britain out of its splendid isolation, though there was 
enough handwringing about it by traditionalists. The first move toward 
greater involvement with the Continent was on behalf of warmer relations 
with imperial Germany. Convinced that Russia and Great Britain desper- 
ately needed Germany, German policymakers thought they could drive a 
hard bargain with both of them simultaneously without specifying the 


178 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


nature of the bargain they were seeking or ever imagining that they might 
be pushing Russia and Great Britain closer together. When rebuffed in 
these all-or-nothing overtures, German leaders would withdraw into sulk- 
iness, which quickly changed to truculence. This approach was in sharp 
contrast to that of France, which settled for slow, step-by-step progress, 
waiting twenty years for Russia and another decade and a half for Great 
Britain to propose an agreement. For all the noise post-Bismarck Ger- 
many made, its foreign policy was overwhelmingly amateurish, short- 
sighted, and even timid when faced with the confrontations it had itself 
generated. 

William II’s first diplomatic move along what turned into a fated course 
came in 1890, shortly after he had dismissed Bismarck, when he rejected 
the Tsar’s offer to renew the Reinsurance Treaty for another three-year 
term. By rejecting Russia’s overture at the very beginning of his rule, the 
Kaiser and his advisers pulled the perhaps most important thread out of 
the fabric of Bismarck’s system of overlapping alliances. Three considera- 
tions motivated them: first, they wanted to make their policy as “simple 
and transparent” as possible (the new Chancellor, Caprivi, confessed on 
one occasion that he simply did not possess Bismarck’s ability to keep 
eight balls in the air at once); second, they wanted to reassure Austria that 
their alliance with it was their top priority; finally, they considered the 
Reinsurance Treaty an obstacle to their preferred course of forging an 
alliance with Great Britain. 

Each of these considerations demonstrated the lack of geopolitical un- 
derstanding by which the Germany of William II progressively isolated 
itself. Complexity was inherent in Germany’s location and history; no 
“simple” policy could take account of its many aspects. It had been pre- 
cisely the ambiguity of a simultaneous treaty with Russia and an alliance 
with Austria that had enabled Bismarck to act as a balancer between 
Austrian fears and Russian ambitions for twenty years without having to 
break with either or to escalate the endemic Balkan crises. Ending the 
Reinsurance Treaty brought about exactly the opposite situation-, limiting 
Germany’s options promoted Austrian adventurism. Nikolai de Giers, the 
Russian Foreign Minister, understood this immediately, noting: “Through 
the dissolution of our treaty [the Reinsurance Treaty], Vienna has been 
liberated from the wise and well-meaning, but also stern control of Prince 
Bismarck.” 9 

Abandoning the Reinsurance Treaty not only caused Germany to lose 
leverage vis4-vis Austria, it above all increased Russia’s anxieties. Ger- 
many’s reliance on Austria was interpreted in St. Petersburg as a new 
predisposition to support Austria in the Balkans. Once Germany had 


179 



Diplomacy 


positioned itself as an obstacle to Russian aims in a region that had never 
before represented a vital German interest, Russia was certain to search 
for a counterweight, which France was only too eager to supply. 

Russia’s temptations to move in France’s direction were strengthened 
by a German colonial agreement with Great Britain, which swiftly fol- 
lowed the Kaiser’s refusal to renew the Reinsurance Treaty. Great Britain 
acquired from Germany the sources of the Nile and tracts of land in East 
Africa, including the island of Zanzibar. As a quid pro quo, Germany 
received a relatively inconsequential strip of land linking South-West Af- 
rica to the Zambezi River, the so-called Caprivi Strip, and the island of 
Helgoland in the North Sea, which was presumed to have some strategic 
value in safeguarding the German coast from naval attack. 

It was not a bad bargain for either side, though it turned into the first 
of a series of misunderstandings. London undertook the agreement as a 
means of settling African colonial issues; Germany saw it as a prelude to 
an Anglo-German alliance; and Russia, going even further, interpreted it 
as England’s first step into the Triple Alliance. Thus Baron Staal, the 
Russian Ambassador to Berlin, anxiously reported the pact between his 
country’s historic friend, Germany, and its traditional foe, Great Britain, 
in these terms: 

When one is united by numerous interests and positive engagements 
on one point of the globe, one is almost certain to proceed in concert 

in all the great questions that may arise in the international field 

Virtually the entente with Germany has been accomplished. It cannot 
help but react upon the relations of England with the other powers of 
the Triple Alliance . 10 

Bismarck’s nightmare of coalitions was now in train, for the end of the 
Reinsurance Treaty had paved the way for a Franco-Russian alliance. 

Germany had calculated that France and Russia would never form an 
alliance, because Russia had no interest in fighting for Alsace-Lorraine, 
and France had no interest in fighting for the Balkan Slavs. It turned out 
to be one of the many egregious misconceptions of imperial Germany’s 
post-Bismarck leadership. Once Germany was irrevocably committed to 
Austria’s side, France and Russia in fact needed each other, however 
divergent their goals, because neither could achieve its own strategic 
objectives without first defeating, or at least weakening, Germany. France 
needed to do so because Germany would never relinquish Alsace-Lor- 
raine without war, while Russia knew it would not be able to inherit 
the Slavic parts of the Austrian Empire without defeating Austria — which 


180 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


Germany had made clear it would resist by its refusal to renew the 
Reinsurance Treaty. And Russia had no chance against Germany without 
the assistance of France. 

Within a year of Germany’s refusal to renew the Reinsurance Treaty, 
France and Russia had signed their Entente Cordiale, which provided 
mutual diplomatic support. Giers, the venerable Russian Foreign Minister, 
warned that the agreement would not solve the fundamental problem that 
Great Britain, not Germany, was Russia’s principal adversary. Desperate to 
escape the isolation to which Bismarck had consigned it, France agreed 
to add a clause to the Franco-Russian agreement obliging France to give 
Russia diplomatic support in any colonial conflict with Great Britain. 

To French leaders, this anti-British clause seemed a small entrance 
fee to establish what was bound to turn into an anti-German coalition. 
Thereafter, French efforts would be directed at extending the Franco- 
Russian agreement into a military alliance. Though Russian nationalists 
favored such a military pact to speed the dismemberment of the Austrian 
Empire, Russian traditionalists were uneasy. Giers’ eventual successor as 
Foreign Minister, Count Vladimir Lamsdorff, wrote in his diary in early 
February 1892: 

They (the French) are also preparing to besiege us with proposals for 
an agreement about joint military actions in case of an attack by a third 
party — But why overdo a good thing? We need peace and quiet in 
view of the miseries of the famine, of the unsatisfactory state of our 
finances, of the uncompleted state of our armaments program, of the 
desperate state of our transportation system, and finally of the renewed 
activity in the camp of the nihilists. 11 

In the end, French leaders overcame Lamsdorff s doubts, or else he was 
overruled by the Tsar. In 1894, a military convention was signed in which 
France agreed to aid Russia if Russia was attacked by Germany, or by 
Austria in combination with Germany. Russia would support France in 
case of an attack by Germany, or by Germany in combination with Italy. 
Whereas the Franco-Russian Agreement of 1891 had been a diplomatic 
instrument and could plausibly have been argued to be aimed at Great 
Britain as well as at Germany, the sole adversary foreseen by this military 
convention was Germany. What George Kennan would later call “the 
fateful alliance” (the entente between France and Russia of 1891, followed 
by the military convention of 1894) marked a watershed in Europe’s rush 
toward war. 

It was the beginning of the end for the operation of the balance of 


181 



Diplomacy 


power. The balance of power works best if at least one of the following 
conditions pertains: First, each nation must feel itself free to align with 
any other state, depending on the circumstances of the moment. Through 
much of the eighteenth century, the equilibrium was adjusted by con- 
stantly shifting alignments; it was also the case in the Bismarck period 
until 1890. Second, when there are fixed alliances but a balancer sees to 
it that none of the existing coalitions becomes predominant — the situa- 
tion after the Franco-Russian treaty, when Great Britain continued to act 
as balancer and was in fact being wooed by both sides. Third, when there 
are rigid alliances and no balancer exists, but the cohesion of the alliances 
is relatively low so that, on any given issue, there are either compromises 
or changes in alignment. 

When none of these conditions prevails, diplomacy turns rigid. A zero 
sum game develops in which any gain of one side is conceived as a loss 
for the other. Armaments races and mounting tensions become inevita- 
ble. This was the situation during the Cold War, and in Europe tacitly after 
Great Britain joined the Franco-Russian alliance, thereby forming the 
Triple Entente starting in 1908. 

Unlike during the Cold War, the international order after 1891 did not 
turn rigid after a single challenge. It took fifteen years before each of the 
three elements of flexibility was destroyed in sequence. After the forma- 
tion of the Triple Entente, the balance of power ceased to function. Tests 
of strength became the rule and not the exception. Diplomacy as the art 
of compromise ended. It was only a question of time before some crisis 
would drive events out of control. 

But in 1891, as France and Russia lined up against it, Germany still 
hoped that it could bring about the offsetting alliance with Great Britain 
for which William II yearned but which his impetuousness made impossi- 
ble. The colonial agreement of 1890 did not lead to the alliance the 
Russian Ambassador had feared. Its failure to materialize was partly due 
to British domestic politics. When the aged Gladstone returned to office 
in 1892 for the last time, he bruised the Kaiser’s tender ego by rejecting 
any association with autocratic Germany or Austria. 

Yet the fundamental reason for the failure of the several attempts to 
arrange an Anglo-German alliance was the German leadership’s persis- 
tent incomprehension of traditional British foreign policy as well as of 
the real requirements of its own security. For a century and a half, Great 
Britain had refused to commit itself to an open-ended military alliance. It 
would make only two kinds of engagements: limited military agreements 
to deal with definable, clearly specified dangers; or entente-type arrange- 
ments to cooperate diplomatically on those issues in which interests with 


182 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


another country ran parallel. In a sense, the British definition of entente 
was, of course, a tautology: Great Britain would cooperate when it chose 
to cooperate. But an entente also had the effect of creating moral and 
psychological ties and a presumption — if not a legal obligation — of joint 
action in crises. And it would have kept Great Britain apart from France 
and Russia, or at least complicated their rapprochement. 

Germany refused such informal procedures. William II insisted on 
what he called a Continental-type alliance. “If England wants allies or 
aid,” he said in 1895, “she must abandon her non-committal policy and 
provide continental type guarantees or treaties.” 12 But what could the 
Kaiser have meant by a Continental-type guarantee? After nearly a century 
of splendid isolation, Great Britain was clearly not ready to undertake the 
permanent Continental commitment it had so consistently avoided for 
150 years, especially on behalf of Germany, which was fast becoming the 
strongest country on the Continent. 

What made this German pressure for a formal guarantee so self- 
defeating was that Germany did not really need it, because it was strong 
enough to defeat any prospective Continental adversary or combination 
of them, so long as Great Britain did not take their side. What Germany 
should have asked of Great Britain was not an alliance, but benevolent 
neutrality in a Continental war — and for that an entente-type arrangement 
would have been sufficient. By asking for what it did not need, and by 
offering what Great Britain did not want (sweeping commitments to de- 
fend the British Empire), Germany led Great Britain to suspect that it was 
in fact seeking world domination. 

German impatience deepened the reserve of the British, who were 
beginning to entertain grave doubts about the judgment of their suitor. 
“I do not like to disregard the plain anxiety of my German friends,” wrote 
Salisbury. “But it is not wise to be guided too much by their advice now. 
Their Achitophel is gone. They are much pleasanter and easier to deal 
with; but one misses the extraordinary penetration of the old man [Bis- 
marck].” 13 

While the German leadership impetuously pursued alliances, the Ger- 
man public was demanding an ever more assertive foreign policy. Only 
the Social Democrats held out for a time, though in the end they, too, 
succumbed to public opinion and supported Germany’s declaration of 
war in 1914. The leading German classes had no experience with Euro- 
pean diplomacy, much less with the Weltpolitik on which they were so 
loudly insisting. The Junkers, who had led Prussia to the domination 
of Germany, would bear the weight of opprobrium after the two world 
wars, especially in the United States. In fact, they were the social stratum 


183 



Diplomacy 


least guilty of overreaching in foreign affairs, being basically geared to 
Continental policy and having little interest in events outside Europe. 
Rather, it was the new industrial managerial and the growing professional 
classes that provided the nucleus of nationalist agitation without encoun- 
tering in the political system the sort of parliamentary buffer which had 
evolved in Great Britain and France over several centuries. In the Western 
democracies, the strong nationalist currents were channeled through 
parliamentary institutioas; in Germany, they had to find expression in 
extra-parliamentary pressure groups. 

As autocratic as Germany was, its leaders were extremely sensitive to 
public opinion and heavily influenced by nationalistic pressure groups. 
These groups saw diplomacy and international relations almost as if they 
were sporting events, always pushing the government to a harder line, 
more territorial expansion, more colonies, a stronger army, or a larger 
navy. They treated the normal give-and-take of diplomacy, or the slightest 
hint of German diplomatic concession, as an egregious humiliation. Kurt 
Rietzler, the political secretary of the German Chancellor Theobald von 
Bethmann-Hollweg, who was in office when war was declared, remarked 
aptly: “The threat of war in our time lies ... in the internal politics of 
those countries in which a weak government is confronted by a strong 
nationalist movement.” 14 

This emotional and political climate produced a major German diplo- 
matic gaffe — the so-called Kruger Telegram — by which the Emperor un- 
dermined his option for a British alliance for at least the rest of the 
century. In 1895, a Colonel Jameson, supported by British colonial inter- 
ests and most notably by Cecil Rhodes, led a raid into the independent 
Boer states of the South African Transvaal. The raid was a total failure and 
a great embarrassment to Salisbury’s government, which claimed to have 
had no direct involvement in it. The German nationalist press gloated, 
urging an even more thorough humiliation of the British. 

Friedrich von Holstein, a principal councilor and eminence grise in the 
Foreign Ministry, saw the disastrous raid as an opportunity to teach the 
British the advantages of a friendly Germany by showing them just how 
prickly an adversary it could be. For his own part, the Kaiser found the 
opportunity to swagger irresistible. Shortly after New Year’s Day 1896, he 
dispatched a message to President Paul Kruger of the Transvaal congratu- 
lating him for repelling “the attacks from without.” It was a direct slap at 
Great Britain and raised the specter of a German protectorate in the heart 
of what the British regarded as their own sphere of interest. In reality, 
the Kruger Telegram represented neither German colonial aspirations 
nor German foreign policy, for it was purely a public-relations ploy and 


184 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


it achieved that objective: “Nothing that the government has done for 
years,” wrote the liberal Allgemeine Zeitung on January 5, “has given 

as complete satisfaction It is written from the soul of the German 

people.” 15 

Germany’s shortsightedness and insensitivity accelerated this trend. 
The Kaiser and his entourage convinced themselves that, since courting 
Great Britain had failed to produce an alliance, perhaps some demonstra- 
tion of the cost of German displeasure would prove more persuasive. 
Unfortunately for Germany, that approach belied the historical record, 
which offered no example of a British susceptibility to being bullied. 

What started out as a form of harassment to demonstrate the value of 
German friendship gradually turned into a genuine strategic challenge. 
No issue was as likely to turn Great Britain into an implacable adversary as 
a threat to its command of the seas. Yet this was precisely what Germany 
undertook, seemingly without realizing that it was embarking on an irrev- 
ocable challenge. Starting in the mid-1890s, domestic pressures to build 
up a large German navy began to mount, spearheaded by the “navalists,” 
one of a growing number of pressure groups which consisted of a mix of 
industrialists and naval officers. Since they developed a vested interest in 
tensions with Great Britain to justify naval appropriations, they treated 
the Kruger Telegram as a godsend, as they did any other issue denoting 
the possibility of conflict with Great Britain in remote corners of the 
globe, ranging from the status of Samoa to the boundaries of the Sudan 
and the future of the Portuguese colonies. 

Thus began a vicious cycle which culminated in confrontation. For the 
privilege of building a navy which, in the subsequent world war, had only 
one inconclusive encounter with the British fleet in the battle of Jutland, 
Germany managed to add Great Britain to its growing list of adversaries. 
For there was no question that England would resist once a Continental 
country already in possession of the strongest army in Europe began 
aiming for parity with Great Britain on the seas. 

Yet the Kaiser seemed oblivious to the impact of his policies. British 
irritation with German bluster and the naval buildup did not, at first, 
change the reality that France was pressing Great Britain in Egypt, and 
that Russia was challenging it in Central Asia. What if Russia and France 
decided to cooperate, applying simultaneous pressure in Africa, Afghani- 
stan, and China? What if the Germans joined them in an assault on the 
Empire in South Africa? British leaders began to doubt whether splendid 
isolation was still an appropriate foreign policy. 

The most important and vocal spokesman of this group was the Colo- 
nial Secretary, Joseph Chamberlain. A dashing figure who was Salisbury’s 


185 



Diplomacy 


junior by a whole generation, Chamberlain seemed to embody the twenti- 
eth century in his call for some alliance — preferably German — while the 
older patrician adhered strictly to the isolationist impulse of the previous 
century. In a major speech in November 1899, Chamberlain called for a 
“Teutonic” alliance, consisting of Great Britain, Germany, and the United 
States. 16 Chamberlain felt so strongly about it that he transmitted his 
scheme to Germany without Salisbury’s approval. But the German leaders 
continued to hold out for formal guarantees and remained oblivious to 
the reality that the terms were irrelevant and that what should have mat- 
tered to them most was British neutrality in a Continental war. 

In October 1900, Salisbury’s poor health forced him to give up the 
office of Foreign Secretary, though he retained the post of Prime Minister. 
His successor at the Foreign Office was Lord Lansdowne, who agreed 
with Chamberlain that Great Britain could no longer enjoy safety through 
splendid isolation. Yet Lansdowne was unable to muster a consensus for 
a full-scale formal alliance with Germany, the Cabinet being unwilling to 
go further than an entente-style arrangement: “. . . an understanding with 
regard to the policy which they (the British and the German govern- 
ments) might pursue in reference to particular questions or in particular 
parts of the world in which they are alike interested.” 17 It was substantially 
the same formula which would lead to the Entente Cordiale with France 
a few years later and which proved quite sufficient to bring Great Britain 
into the World War on the side of France. 

Once again, however, Germany rejected the attainable in favor of what 
was on the face of it unachievable. The new German Chancellor Billow 
refused an entente-style arrangement with Great Britain because he was 
more worried about public opinion than he was about geopolitical vistas 
— especially given his priority of persuading the Parliament to vote a 
large increase in the German navy. He would curtail the naval program 
for nothing less than British adherence to a triple alliance consisting 
of Germany, Austria, and Italy. Salisbury rejected Billows all-or-nothing 
gambit, and, for the third time in a decade, an Anglo-German agreement 
aborted. 

The essential incompatibility between British and German perceptions 
of foreign policy could be seen in the way the two leaders explained their 
failure to agree. Billow was all emotion as he accused Great Britain of 
provincialism, ignoring the fact that Great Britain had been conducting a 
global foreign policy for over a century before Germany was even unified: 

English politicians know little about the Continent. From a continental 

point of view they know as much as we do about ideas in Peru or 


186 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


Siam. They are naive in their conscious egotism and in a certain blind 
confidence. They find it difficult to credit really bad intentions in others. 
They are very quiet, very phlegmatic and very optimistic 18 

Salisbury’s reply took the form of a lesson in sophisticated strategic analy- 
sis for his restless and rather vague interlocutor. Citing a tactless comment 
by the German Ambassador to London, to the effect that Great Britain 
needed an alliance with Germany in order to escape dangerous isolation, 
he wrote: 

The liability of having to defend the German and Austrian frontiers 
against Russia is heavier than that of having to defend the British Isles 
against France . . . Count Hatzfeldt [the German Ambassador] speaks of 
our “isolation” as constituting a serious danger for us. Have we ever 
felt that danger practically? If we had succumbed in the revolutionary 
war, our fall would not have been due to our isolation. We had many 
allies, but they would not have saved us if the French Emperor had 
been able to command the Channel. Except during his [Napoleon’s] 
reign we have never even been in danger; and, therefore, it is impossi- 
ble for us to judge whether the “isolation” under which we are sup- 
posed to suffer, does or does not contain in it any elements of peril. It 
would hardly be wise to incur novel and most onerous obligations, in 
order to guard against a danger in whose existence we have no histori- 
cal reason for believing . 19 

Great Britain and Germany simply did not have enough parallel interests 
to justify the formal global alliance imperial Germany craved. The British 
feared that further additions to German strength would turn their would- 
be ally into the sort of dominant power they had historically resisted. At 
the same time, Germany did not relish assuming the role of a British 
auxiliary on behalf of issues traditionally considered peripheral to Ger- 
man interests, such as the threat to India, and Germany was too arrogant 
to understand the benefits of British neutrality. 

Foreign Secretary Lansdowne’s next move demonstrated that the Ger- 
man leaders’ conviction that their country was indispensable to Great 
Britain was a case of inflated self-appraisal. In 1902, he stunned Europe 
by forging an alliance with Japan, the first time since Richelieu’s dealings 
with the Ottoman Turks that any European country had gone for help 
outside the Concert of Europe. Great Britain and Japan agreed that if 
either of them became involved in a war with one other power over 
China or Korea, the other would observe neutrality. If, however, either 
signatory was attacked by two adversaries, the other signatory was obliged 


187 



Diplomacy 


to assist its partner. Because the alliance would operate only if Japan were 
fighting two adversaries, Great Britain finally had discovered an ally which 
was willing, indeed eager, to contain Russia without, however, seeking to 
entangle it in extraneous arrangements — one, moreover, whose Far East 
location placed it in an area of greater strategic interest to Great Britain 
than the Russo-German frontier. And Japan was protected against France, 
which, without the alliance, might have sought to use the war to 
strengthen its claims on Russian support. From then on, Great Britain 
would lose interest in Germany as a strategic partner; indeed, in the 
course of time, it would come to regard Germany as a geopolitical threat. 

As late as 1912, there was still a chance of settling Anglo-German diffi- 
culties. Lord Haldane, first Lord of the Admiralty, visited Berlin to discuss 
a relaxation of tensions. Haldane was instructed to seek an accommoda- 
tion with Germany on the basis of a naval accord along with this pledge 
of British neutrality: “If either of the high contracting parties (i.e., Britain 
and Germany) becomes entangled in a war in which it cannot be said to 
be the aggressor, the other will at least observe towards the Power so 
entangled a benevolent neutrality.” 20 The Kaiser, however, insisted that 
England pledge neutrality “should war be forced upon Germany,” 21 
which sounded to London like a demand that Great Britain stand on the 
sidelines if Germany decided to launch a pre-emptive war against Russia 
or France. When the British refused to accept the Kaiser’s wording, he in 
turn rejected theirs; the German Navy Bill went forward, and Haldane 
returned to London empty-handed. 

The Kaiser still had not grasped that Great Britain would not go beyond 
a tacit bargain, which was really all that Germany needed. “If England 
only intends to extend her hand to us under the condition that we must 
limit our fleet,” he wrote, “that is an unbounded impudence which con- 
tains in it a bad insult to the German people and their Emperor. This 
offer must be rejected a limine. . . ,” 22 As convinced as ever that he could 
intimidate England into a formal alliance, the Kaiser boasted: “I have 
shown the English that, when they touch our armaments, they bite on 
granite. Perhaps by this I have increased their hatred but won their re- 
spect, which will induce them in due course to resume negotiations, it is 
to be hoped in a more modest tone and with a more fortunate result.” 23 

The Kaiser’s impetuous and imperious quest for alliance merely suc- 
ceeded in magnifying Great Britain’s suspicions. The German naval pro- 
gram on top of German harassment of Great Britain during the Boer War 
of 1899-1902 led to a thorough reassessment of British foreign policy. 
For a century and a half, Great Britain had considered France as the 
principal threat to the European equilibrium, to be resisted with the 


188 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


assistance of some German state, usually with Austria, occasionally with 
Prussia. And it had viewed Russia as the gravest danger to its empire. But 
once it had the Japanese alliance in hand, Great Britain began to recon- 
sider its historic priorities. In 1903, Great Britain initiated a systematic 
effort to settle outstanding colonial issues with France, culminating in the 
so-called Entente Cordiale of 1904 — precisely the sort of arrangement 
for informal cooperation that Germany had consistently rejected. Almost 
immediately afterward, Great Britain began to explore a similar arrange- 
ment with Russia. 

Because the Entente was formally a colonial agreement, it did not 
represent a technical break with the traditional British policy of “splendid 
isolation." Yet its practical effect was that Great Britain abandoned the 
position of balancer and attached itself to one of the two opposing alli- 
ances. In July 1903, when the Entente was being negotiated, a French 
representative in London told Lansdowne as a quid pro quo that France 
would do its utmost to relieve Great Britain of Russian pressures else- 
where: 

. . . that the most serious menace to the peace of Europe lay in Germany, 
that a good understanding between France and England was the only 
means of holding German designs in check, and that if such an under- 
standing could be arrived at, England would find that France would be 
able to exercise a salutary influence over Russia and thereby relieve us 
from many of our troubles with that country. 24 

Within a decade, Russia, previously tied to Germany by the Reinsurance 
Treaty, had become a military ally of France, while Great Britain, an on- 
again-off-again suitor of Germany, joined the French diplomatic camp. 
Germany had achieved the extraordinary feat of isolating itself and of 
bringing together three erstwhile enemies in a hostile coalition aimed 
against it. 

A statesman aware of approaching danger has to make a basic decision. 
If he believes that the threat will mount with the passage of time, he must 
try to nip it in the bud. But if he concludes that the looming danger 
reflects a fortuitous, if accidental, combination of circumstances, he is 
usually better off waiting and letting time erode the peril. Two hundred 
years earlier, Richelieu had recognized the danger in the hostile encircle- 
ment of France — indeed, avoiding it was the core of his policy. But he 
understood as well the various components of that potential danger. He 
decided that premature action would drive the states surrounding France 
together. Thus he made time his ally and waited for the latent differences 


189 



Diplomacy 


among France’s adversaries to emerge. Then, and only after these had 
become entrenched, did he permit France to enter the fray. 

The Kaiser and his advisers had neither the patience nor the acumen 
for such a policy — even though the countries by which Germany felt 
threatened were anything but natural allies. Germany’s reaction to the 
looming encirclement was to accelerate the same diplomacy which had 
brought about the danger in the first place. It tried to split the young 
Entente Cordiale by finding some pretext to face down France, thereby 
demonstrating that British support was either illusory or ineffective. 

Germany’s opportunity to test the strength of the Entente presented 
itself in Morocco, where French designs were in violation of a treaty 
affirming Morocco’s independence, and where Germany had substantial 
commercial interests. The Kaiser chose to make his point while on a 
cruise in March 1905- Landing at Tangier, he declared Germany’s resolve 
to uphold the independence of Morocco. The German leaders were gam- 
bling, first, that the United States, Italy, and Austria would support their 
open-door policy, second, that in the aftermath of the Russo-Japanese 
War, Russia would not be able to involve itself, and third, that Great 
Britain would be only too happy to be relieved of its obligation to France 
at an international conference. 

All of these assumptions were proved wrong because fear of Germany 
overrode every other consideration. In the first challenge to the Entente 
Cordiale, Great Britain backed France to the hilt and would not go along 
with Germany’s call for a conference until France had accepted it. Austria 
and Italy were reluctant to venture anywhere near the brink of war. 
Nevertheless, German leaders invested a huge amount of prestige in this 
growing dispute, on the reasoning that anything less than a diplomatic 
victory demonstrating the irrelevance of the Entente would be disastrous. 

Throughout his reign, the Kaiser was better at staning crises than he 
was at concluding them. He found dramatic encounters exciting but 
lacked the nerve for prolonged confrontation. William II and his advisers 
were correct in their assessment that France was not prepared to go to 
war. But, as it turned out, neither were they. All they really achieved was 
the dismissal of French Foreign Minister Delcasse, a token victory because 
Delcasse soon returned in another position, retaining a major role in 
French politics. In terms of the substance of the dispute, the German 
leaders, lacking the courage of their boastful rhetoric, permitted them- 
selves to be fobbed off with a conference scheduled in six months’ time 
in the Spanish town of Algeciras. When a country threatens war and then 
backs down in favor of a conference to be held at some later date, it 
automatically diminishes the credibility of its threat. (This was also the 


190 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


way the Western democracies would defuse Khrushchev’s Berlin ultima- 
tum a half century later.) 

The extent to which Germany had isolated itself became evident at 
the opening of the Algeciras Conference in January 1906. Edward Grey, 
the Foreign Secretary of Great Britain’s new Liberal government, warned 
the German Ambassador to London that, in the event of war, Great Britain 
would stand alongside France: 

... in the event of an attack upon France by Germany arising out of our 
Morocco Agreement, public feeling in England would be so strong that 
no British government could remain neutral . . 

The German leaders’ emotionalism and inability to define long-range 
objectives turned Algeciras into a diplomatic debacle for their country. 
The United States, Italy, Russia, and Great Britain all refused to take Ger- 
many’s side. The results of this first Moroccan crisis were the exact oppo- 
site of what German leaders had sought to achieve. Instead of wrecking 
the Entente Cordiale, it led to Franco-British military cooperation and 
lent impetus to the Anglo-Russian Entente of 1907. 

After Algeciras, Great Britain agreed to the military cooperation with a 
Continental power that it had avoided for so long. Consultations began 
between the leaders of the British and French navies. The Cabinet was 
not at ease with this new departure. Grey wrote to Paul Cambon, the 
French Ambassador to London, in an effort to hedge his bets: 

We have agreed that consultation between experts is not, and ought not 
to be, regarded as an engagement that commits either Government to 
action in a contingency that has not arisen and may never arise — 26 

It was the traditional British escape clause that London not commit itself 
legally to specific circumstances in which it would be obliged to take 
military action. France accepted this sop to parliamentary control, con- 
vinced that military staff talks would wield their own reality, whatever the 
legal obligation. For a decade and a half, German leaders had refused to 
grant Great Britain this son of leeway. The French had the political acu- 
men to live with British ambiguity, and to rely on the conviction that a 
moral obligation was developing which, in a time of crisis, might well 
carry the day. 

With the emergence of the Anglo-French-Russian bloc of 1907, only 
two forces remained in play in European diplomacy: the Triple Entente 
and the alliance between Germany and Austria. German encirclement 


191 



Diplomacy 


became complete. Like the Anglo-French Entente, the British agreement 
with Russia began as a colonial accord. For some years, Great Britain and 
Russia had been slowly putting their colonial disputes to rest. Japan’s 
victory over Russia in 1905 effectively ruined Russia’s Far Eastern ambi- 
tions. By the summer of 1907, it became safe for Great Britain to offer 
Russia generous terms in Afghanistan and Persia, dividing Persia into 
three spheres of influence: the Russians were given the northern region; 
a central region was declared neutral; and Great Britain claimed control 
of the south. Afghanistan went to the British sphere. Anglo-Russian rela- 
tions, which ten years earlier had been marred by disputes covering a 
third of the globe from Constantinople to Korea, were finally serene. The 
degree of British preoccupation with Germany was shown by the fact that, 
to secure Russian cooperation, Great Britain was prepared to abandon its 
determination to keep Russia out of the Dardanelles. As Foreign Secretary 
Grey remarked: “Good relations with Russia meant that our old policy of 
closing the Straits against her, and throwing our weight against her at any 
conference of the Powers must be abandoned.” 27 

Some historians 28 have claimed that the real Triple Entente was two 
colonial agreements gone awry, and that Great Britain had wanted to 
protect its empire, not to encircle Germany. There is a classic document, 
however, the so-called Crowe Memorandum, which leaves no reasonable 
doubt that Great Britain joined the Triple Entente in order to thwart what 
it feared was a German drive for world domination. On January 1, 1907, 
Sir Eyre Crowe, a prominent British Foreign Office analyst, explained 
why, in his view, an accommodation with Germany was impossible and 
entente with France was the only option. The Crowe Memorandum was 
at a level of analysis never reached by any document of post-Bismarck 
Germany. The conflict had become one between strategy and brute 
power — and unless there is a huge disproportion of strength, which was 
not the case, the strategist has the upper hand because he can plan his 
actions while his adversary is obliged to improvise. Admitting to major 
differences between Great Britain and both France and Russia, Crowe 
nevertheless assessed these as being subject to compromise because they 
reflected definable, and therefore limited, objectives. What made German 
foreign policy so menacing was the lack of any discernible rationale 
behind its ceaseless global challenges, which extended across regions as 
far-flung as South Africa, Morocco, and the Near East. In addition, the 
German drive for maritime power was “incompatible with the survival of 
the British Empire.” 

According to Crowe, Germany’s unconstrained conduct guaranteed 
confrontation: “The union of the greatest military with the greatest naval 


192 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


power in one state would compel the world to combine for the riddance 
of such an incubus.” 29 

True to the tenets of Realpolitik, Crowe argued that structure, not 
motive, determined stability: Germany’s intentions were essentially irrele- 
vant; what mattered were its capabilities. He put forward two hypotheses: 

Either Germany is definitely aiming at a general political hegemony 
and maritime ascendancy, threatening the independence of her 
neighbours and ultimately the existence of England; Or Germany, free 
from any such clear-cut ambition, and thinking for the present merely 
of using her legitimate position and influence as one of the leading 
Powers in the council of nations, is seeking to promote her foreign 
commerce, spread the benefits of German culture, extend the scope of 
her national energies, and create fresh German interests all over the 
world wherever and whenever a peaceful opportunity offers 30 

Crowe insisted that these distinctions were irrelevant because, in the end, 
they would be overridden by the temptations inherent in Germany’s 
growing power: 

... it is clear that the second scheme (of semi-independent evolution, 
not entirely unaided by statecraft) may at any stage merge into the first, 
or conscious-design scheme. Moreover, if ever the evolution scheme 
should come to be realized, the position thereby accruing to Germany 
would obviously constitute as formidable a menace to the rest of the 
world as would be presented by any deliberate conquest of a similar 
position by malice aforethought’. 31 

Though the Crowe Memorandum did not actually go further than to 
oppose an understanding with Germany, its thrust was clear: if Germany 
did not abandon its quest for maritime supremacy and moderate its so- 
called Weltpolitik, Great Britain was certain to join Russia and France in 
opposing it. And it would do so with the implacable tenacity that had 
brought down French and Spanish pretensions in previous centuries. 

Great Britain made it clear that it would not stand for any further 
accretion of German strength. In 1909, Foreign Secretary Grey made this 
point in response to a German offer to slow down (but not end) its naval 
buildup if Great Britain agreed to stay neutral in a German war against 
France and Russia. The proposed agreement, argued Grey, 

. . . would serve to establish German hegemony in Europe and would 
not last long after it had served that purpose. It is in fact an invitation to 


193 



Diplomacy 


help Germany to make a European combination which could be di- 
rected against us when it suited her to use it If we sacrifice the other 

Powers to Germany, we shall eventually be attacked. 32 

After the creation of the Triple Entente, the cat-and-mouse game Germany 
and Great Britain had played in the 1890s grew deadly serious and turned 
into a struggle between a status quo power and a power demanding a 
change in the equilibrium. With diplomatic flexibility no longer possible, 
the only way to alter the balance of power was by adding more arms or 
by victory in war. 

The two alliances were facing each other across a gulf of growing 
mutual distrust. Unlike the period of the Cold War, the two groupings did 
not fear war; they were in fact more concerned with preserving their 
cohesiveness than with avoiding a showdown. Confrontation became the 
standard method of diplomacy. 

Nevertheless, there was still a chance to avoid catastrophe because 
there were actually few issues that justified war dividing the alliances. No 
other member of the Triple Entente would have gone to war to help 
France regain Alsace-Lorraine; Germany, even in its exalted frame of 
mind, was unlikely to support an Austrian war of aggression in the Bal- 
kans. A policy of restraint might have delayed the war and caused the 
unnatural alliances gradually to disintegrate — especially as the Triple En- 
tente had been forged by fear of Germany in the first place. 

By the end of the first decade of the twentieth century, the balance of 
power had degenerated into hostile coalitions whose rigidity was 
matched by the reckless disregard for consequence with which they had 
been assembled. Russia was tied to a Serbia teeming with nationalist, 
even terrorist, factions and which, having nothing to lose, had no concern 
for the risk of a general war. France had handed a blank check to a Russia 
eager to restore its self-respect after the Russo-Japanese War. Germany 
had done the same for an Austria desperate to protea its Slavic provinces 
against agitation from Serbia, which, in turn, was backed by Russia. The 
nations of Europe had permitted themselves to become captives of reck- 
less Balkan clients. Far from restraining these nations of unbounded pas- 
sion and limited sense of global responsibility, they allowed themselves 
to be dragged along by the paranoia that their restless partners might 
shift alliances if they were not given their way. For a few years, crises were 
still being surmounted although each new one brought the inevitable 
showdown closer. And Germany’s reaction to the Triple Entente revealed 
a dogged determination to repeat the same mistake over and over again; 
every problem became transformed into a test of manhood to prove that 
Germany was decisive and powerful while its adversaries lacked resolu- 


194 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


tion and strength. Yet, with each new German challenge, the bonds of the 
Triple Entente grew tighter. 

In 1908, an international crisis occurred over Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
worth retelling because it illustrates the tendency of history to repeat 
itself. Bosnia-Herzegovina had been the backwater of Europe, its fate 
having been left in an ambiguous status at the Congress of Berlin because 
no one really knew what to do with it. This no-man’s-land between the 
Ottoman and Habsburg Empires, which contained Roman Catholic, Or- 
thodox, and Muslim religions, and Croatian, Serbian, and Muslim popula- 
tions, had never been a state or even self-governing. It only seemed 
governable if none of these groups was asked to submit to the others. 
For thirty years, Bosnia-Herzegovina had been under Turkish suzerainty, 
Austrian administration, and local autonomy without experiencing a seri- 
ous challenge to this multinational arrangement which left the issue of 
ultimate sovereignty unsettled. Austria had waited thirty years to initiate 
outright annexation because the passions of the polyglot mix were too 
complex even for the Austrians to sort out, despite their long experience 
of administering in the midst of chaos. When they finally did annex Bos- 
nia-Herzegovina, they did so more to score a point against Serbia (and 
indirectly Russia) than to achieve any coherent political objective. As a 
result, Austria upset the delicate balance of offsetting hatreds. 

Three generations later, in 1992, the same elemental passions erupted 
over comparable issues, confounding all but the zealots directly involved 
and those familiar with the region’s volatile history. Once more, an abrupt 
change in government turned Bosnia-Herzegovina into a cauldron. As 
soon as Bosnia was declared an independent state, all the nationalities 
fell upon each other in a struggle for dominance, with the Serbs settling 
old scores in a particularly brutal manner. 

Taking advantage of Russia’s weakness in the wake of the Russo-Japa- 
nese War, Austria frivolously implemented a thirty-year-old secret codicil 
from the Congress of Berlin in which the powers had agreed to let Austria 
annex Bosnia-Herzegovina. Heretofore, Austria had been satisfied with de 
facto control because it wanted no more Slavic subjects. But in 1908, 
Austria reversed that decision, fearing its empire was about to dissolve 
under the impact of Serbian agitation and thinking that it needed some 
success to demonstrate its continued pre-eminence in the Balkans. In the 
intervening three decades, Russia had lost its dominant position in Bul- 
garia and the Three Emperors’ League had lapsed. Not unreasonably, 
Russia was outraged that the all-but-forgotten agreement should now be 
invoked to permit Austria to acquire a territory which a Russian war had 
liberated. 

But outrage does not guarantee success, especially when its target is 


195 



Diplomacy 


already in possession of the prize. For the first time, Germany placed 
itself squarely behind Austria, signaling that it was prepared to risk a 
European war if Russia challenged the annexation. Then, making matters 
even more tense, Germany demanded formal Russian and Serbian recog- 
nition of Austria’s move. Russia had to swallow this humiliation because 
Great Britain and France were not yet ready to go to war over a Balkan 
issue, and because Russia was in no position to go to war all alone so 
soon after its defeat in the Russo-Japanese War. 

Germany thus placed itself as an obstacle in Russia’s path and in an 
area where it had never before asserted a vital interest — indeed, where 
Russia had heretofore been able to count on Germany to moderate Aus- 
tria’s ambitions. Germany demonstrated not only its recklessness but a 
severe lapse of historical memory. Only half a century before, Bismarck 
had accurately predicted that Russia would never forgive Austria for hu- 
miliating it in the Crimean War. Now, Germany was making the same 
mistake, compounding Russia’s estrangement, which had started at the 
Congress of Berlin. 

Humiliating a great country without weakening it is always a dangerous 
game. Though Germany thought it was teaching Russia the importance of 
German goodwill, Russia resolved never to be caught flat-footed again. 
The two great Continental powers thus began to play a game called 
“chicken” in American slang, in which two drivers hurtle their vehicles 
toward each other, each hoping that the other will veer off at the last 
moment while counting on his own more steady nerves. Unfortunately, 
this game was played on several different occasions in pre-World War I 
Europe. Each time a collision was avoided, the collective confidence in 
the game’s ultimate safety was strengthened, causing everyone to forget 
that a single failure would produce irrevocable catastrophe. 

As if Germany wanted to make perfectly sure that it had not neglected 
to bully any potential adversary or to give all of them sufficient reason to 
tighten their bonds to each other in self-defense, it next challenged 
France. In 1911, France, now effectively the civil administrator of Mo- 
rocco, responded to local unrest by sending troops to the city of Fez, in 
clear violation of the Algeciras accord. To the wild applause of the nation- 
alist German press, the Kaiser reacted by dispatching the gunboat Panther 
to the Moroccan port of Agadir. “Hurrah! A Deed!” wrote the Rheinisch- 
Westfaliscbe Zeitung on July 2, 1911. “Action at last, a liberating deed 
which must dissolve the cloud of pessimism everywhere.” 33 The Miin- 
chener Neueste Nachrichten advised that the government push ahead with 
every energy, “even if out of such a policy, circumstances arise that we 
cannot foresee today.” 34 In what passed for subtlety in the German press, 
the journal was basically urging Germany to risk war over Morocco. 


196 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


The grandiloquently named ‘‘Panther Leap” had the same ending as 
Germany’s previous efforts to break its self-inflicted encirclement. Once 
again, Germany and France seemed poised on the brink of a war, with 
Germany’s goals as ill-defined as ever. What sort of compensation was it 
seeking this time? A Moroccan port? Part of Morocco’s Atlantic coast? 
Colonial gains elsewhere? It wanted to intimidate France but could find 
no operational expression for that objective. 

In keeping with their evolving relationship, Great Britain backed 
France more firmly than it had at Algeciras in 1906. The shift in British 
public opinion was demonstrated by the attitude of its then Chancellor of 
the Exchequer, David Lloyd George, who had a well-deserved reputation 
for pacifism and as an advocate of good relations with Germany. On this 
occasion, however, he delivered a major speech which warned that if 

... a situation were to be forced upon us in which peace could only be 
preserved by the surrender of the great and beneficent position we had 
won by centuries of heroism and achievement . . . then I say emphati- 
cally that peace at that price would be a humiliation intolerable for a 
great country like ours to endure. 35 

Even Austria turned a cold shoulder on its powerful ally, seeing no point 
in staking its survival on a North African adventure. Germany backed 
down, accepting a large but worthless tract of land in Central Africa, a 
transaction which elicited a groan from Germany’s nationalistic press. 
“We practically risked a world war for a few Congolese swamps,” wrote 
the Berliner Tagehlatt on November 3, 191 1. 36 Yet what ought to have 
been criticized was not the value of the new acquisitions but the wisdom 
of threatening a different country with war every few years without being 
able to define a meaningful objective, each time magnifying the fear 
which had brought the hostile coalitions into being in the first place. 

If German tactics had by now become stereotyped, so had the Anglo- 
French response. In 1912, Great Britain, France, and Russia started mili- 
tary staff talks, the significance of which was only formally limited by the 
usual British disclaimer that they constituted no legally binding commit- 
ment. Even this constraint was belied to some extent by the Anglo-French 
Naval Treaty of 1912, according to which the French fleet was moved to 
the Mediterranean and Great Britain assumed responsibility for de- 
fending the French Atlantic coast. Two years later, this agreement would 
be invoked as a moral obligation for Great Britain to enter the First 
World War because, so it was claimed, France had left its Channel coast 
undefended in reliance on British support. (Twenty-eight years later, in 
1940, a similar agreement between the United States and Great Britain 


197 



Diplomacy 


would enable Great Britain to move its Pacific fleet to the Atlantic, im- 
plying a moral obligation on the part of the United States to protect Great 
Britain’s nearby defenseless Asian possessions against Japanese attack.) 

In 1913, German leaders culminated the alienation of Russia by another 
of their fitful and pointless maneuvers. This time, Germany agreed to 
reorganize the Turkish army and to send a German general to assume 
command over Constantinople. William II dramatized the challenge by 
sending off the training mission with a typically grandiloquent flourish, 
expressing his hope that “the German flags will soon fly over the fortifi- 
cations of the Bosphorus.” 37 

Few events could have enraged Russia more than Germany’s laying 
claim to the position in the Straits that Europe had denied to Russia for a 
century. Russia had with difficulty reconciled itself to the control of the 
Straits by a weak country like Ottoman Turkey, but it would never acqui- 
esce to domination of the Dardanelles by another Great Power. The 
Russian Foreign Minister, Sergei Sazonov, wrote to the Tsar in December 
1913: “To abandon the Straits to a powerful state would be synonymous 
with subordinating the whole economic development of southern Russia 
to this state.” 38 Nicholas II told the British Ambassador that “Germany was 
aiming at acquiring such a position at Constantinople as would enable it 
to shut in Russia altogether in the Black Sea. Should she attempt to carry 
out this policy, he would have to resist it with all his power, even if war 
should be the only alternative.” 39 

Though Germany devised a face-saving formula for removing the Ger- 
man commander from Constantinople (by promoting him to field mar- 
shal, which, according to German tradition, meant he could no longer 
command troops in the field), irreparable damage had been done. Russia 
understood that Germany’s support to Austria over Bosnia-Herzegovina 
had not been an aberration. The Kaiser, regarding these developments as 
tests of his manhood, told his chancellor on February 25, 1914: “Russo- 
Prussian relations are dead once and for all! We have become enemies!” 40 
Six months later, World War I broke out. 

An international system had evolved whose rigidity and confrontational 
style paralleled that of the later Cold War. But in fact, the pre-World War 
I international order was far more volatile than the Cold War world. In 
the Nuclear Age, only the United States and the Soviet Union had the 
technical means to start a general war in which the risks were so cataclys- 
mic that neither superpower dared to delegate such awesome power to 
an ally, however close. By contrast, prior to World War I, each member 
of the two main coalitions was in a position not only to start a war but to 
blackmail its allies into supporting it. 


198 



A Political Doomsday Machine 


For a while, the alliance system itself provided a certain restraint. 
France held Russia back in conflicts which primarily involved Austria; 
Germany played a similar role with Austria vis-a-vis Russia. In the Bosnian 
crisis of 1908, France made it clear that it would not go to war over a 
Balkan issue. During the Moroccan crisis of 1911, French President Calli- 
aux was told firmly that any French attempt to resolve a colonial crisis by 
force would not receive Russian support. As late as the Balkan War of 
1912, Germany warned Austria that there were limits to German backing, 
and Great Britain pressured Russia to moderate its acts on behalf of the 
volatile and unpredictable Balkan League, which was led by Serbia. At 
the London Conference of 1913, Great Britain helped to thwart Serbian 
annexation of Albania, which would have been intolerable to Austria. 

The London Conference of 1913 would, however, be the last time that 
the pre-World War I international system could ease conflicts. Serbia was 
unhappy with Russia’s lukewarm support, while Russia resented Great 
Britain’s posture as an impartial arbiter and France’s clear reluctance to 
go to war. Austria, on the verge of disintegrating under Russian and 
South Slav pressures, was upset that Germany was not backing it more 
vigorously. Serbia, Russia, and Austria all expected greater support from 
their allies; France, Great Britain, and Germany feared that they might 
lose their partners if they did not support them more forcefully in the 
next crisis. 

Afterward, each Great Power was suddenly seized by panic that a con- 
ciliatory stance would make it appear weak and unreliable and cause its 
partners to leave it facing a hostile coalition all alone. Countries began to 
assume levels of risk unwarranted by their historic national interests or 
by any rational long-term strategic objective. Richelieu’s dictum that 
means must correspond to ends was violated almost daily. Germany ac- 
cepted the risk of world war in order to be seen as supportive of Vienna’s 
South Slav policy, in which it had no national interest. Russia was willing 
to risk a fight to the death with Germany in order to be viewed as Serbia’s 
steadfast ally. Germany and Russia had no major conflict with each other; 
their confrontation was by proxy. 

In 1912, the new French President, Raymond Poincare, informed the 
Russian Ambassador with respect to the Balkans that “if Russia goes to 
war, France will also, as we know that in this question Germany is behind 
Austria.’’ 41 The gleeful Russian Ambassador reported “a completely new 
French view” that “the territorial grabs by Austria affect the general Euro- 
pean balance and therefore France’s interests.” 42 That same year, the 
British Undersecretary in the Foreign Office, Sir Arthur Nicholson, wrote 
to the British Ambassador in St. Petersburg: “I do not know how much 


199 



Diplomacy 


longer we shall be able to follow our present policy of dancing on a tight 
rope, and not be compelled to take some definite line or other. I am also 
haunted by the same fear as you — lest Russia should become tired of us 
and strike a bargain with Germany.” 43 

Not to be outdone in recklessness, the Kaiser promised Austria in 1913 
that, in the next crisis, Germany would follow it into war if necessary. On 
July 7, 1914, the German Chancellor explained the policy which, less than 
four weeks later, would lead to actual war: “If we urge them [the Austri- 
ans] ahead, then they will say we pushed them in; if we dissuade them, 
then it will become a matter of our leaving them in the lurch. Then they 
will turn to the Western Powers, whose arms are wide open, and we will 
lose our last ally, such as it is.” 44 The precise benefit Austria was to draw 
from an alliance with the Triple Entente was left undefined. Nor was it 
likely that Austria could join a grouping containing Russia, which sought 
to undermine Austria’s Balkan position. Historically, alliances had been 
formed to augment a nation’s strength in case of war; as World War I 
approached, the primary motive for war was to strengthen the alliances. 

The leaders of all the major countries simply did not grasp the implica- 
tions of the technology at their disposal, or of the coalitions they were 
feverishly constructing. They seemed oblivious to the huge casualties of 
the still relatively recent American Civil War, and expected a short, deci- 
sive conflict. It never occurred to them that the failure to make their 
alliances correspond to rational political objectives would lead to the 
destruction of civilization as they knew it. Each alliance had too much at 
stake to permit the traditional Concert of Europe diplomacy to work. 
Instead, the Great Powers managed to construct a diplomatic doomsday 
machine, though they were unaware of what they had done. 


200 




CHAPTER EIGHT 

Into the Vortex: The Military 
Doomsday Machine 


ihe astonishing aspect of the outbreak of the First World War is not that 
a crisis simpler than many already surmounted had finally triggered a 
global catastrophe, but that it took so long for it to happen. By 1914, the 
confrontation between Germany and Austria-Hungary on the one side, 
and the Triple Entente on the other, had turned deadly earnest. The 
statesmen of all the major countries had helped to construct the diplo- 
matic doomsday mechanism that made each succeeding crisis progres- 
sively more difficult to solve. Their military chiefs had vastly compounded 
the peril by adding strategic plans which compressed the time available 
for decision-making. Since the military plans depended on speed and the 
diplomatic machinery was geared to its traditional leisurely pace, it be- 
came impossible to disentangle the crisis under intense time pressure. 
To make matters worse, the military planners had not adequately ex- 
plained the implications of their handiwork to their political colleagues. 


201 



Diplomacy 


Military planning had, in effect, become autonomous. The first step in 
this direction occurred during the negotiation for a Franco-Russian mili- 
tary alliance in 1892. Up to that time, alliance negotiations had been about 
the casus belli, or what specific actions by the adversary might oblige 
allies to go to war. Almost invariably, its definition hinged on who was 
perceived to have initiated the hostilities. 

In May 1892, the Russian negotiator, Adjutant General Nikolai Obru- 
chev, sent a letter to his Foreign Minister, Giers, explaining why the 
traditional method for defining the casus belli had been overtaken by 
modern technology. Obruchev argued that what mattered was who mobi- 
lized first, not who fired the first shot: “The undertaking of mobilization 
can no longer be considered as a peaceful act; on the contrary, it repre- 
sents the most decisive act of war.” 1 

The side that procrastinated in mobilizing would lose the benefit of its 
alliances and enable its enemy to defeat each adversary in turn. The need 
for all the allies to mobilize simultaneously had become so urgent in the 
minds of European leaders that it turned into the keystone of solemn 
diplomatic engagements. The purpose of alliances was no longer to guar- 
antee support after a war had started, but to guarantee that each ally 
would mobilize as soon as and, it was hoped, just before, any adversary 
did. When alliances so constructed confronted each other, threats based 
on mobilization became irreversible because stopping mobilization in 
midstream was more disastrous than not having started it at all. If one 
side stopped while the other proceeded, it would be at a growing disad- 
vantage with every passing day. If both sides tried to stop simultaneously, 
it would be technically so difficult that almost certainly the mobilization 
would be completed before the diplomats could agree on how to arrest 
it. 

This doomsday procedure effectively removed the casus belli from 
political control. Every crisis had a built-in escalator to war — the decision 
to mobilize — and every war was certain to become general. 

Far from deploring the prospect of automatic escalation, Obruchev 
welcomed it enthusiastically. The last thing he wanted was a local conflict. 
For, if Germany were to stay out of a war between Russia and Austria, it 
would simply emerge afterward in a position to dictate the terms of the 
peace. In Obruchev’s fantasy, this was what Bismarck had done at the 
Congress of Berlin: 

Less than any other can our diplomacy count on an isolated conflict of 

Russia, for example, with Germany, or Austria, or Turkey alone. The 

Congress of Berlin was lesson enough for us in this connection, and it 


202 



Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 


taught us whom we should regard as our most dangerous enemy — the 
one who fights with us directly or the one who waits for our weakening 
and then dictates the terms of peace? . . . 2 

According to Obruchev, it was in Russia’s interest to make certain that 
every war would be general. The benefit to Russia of a well-constructed 
alliance with France would be to prevent the possibility of a localized 
war: 


At the outset of every European war there is always a great temptation 
for the diplomats to localize the conflict and to limit its effects as far as 
possible. But in the present armed and agitated condition of continental 
Europe, Russia must regard any such localization of the war with partic- 
ular skepticism, because this could unduly strengthen the possibilities 
not only for those of our enemies who are hesitating and have not 
come out into the open, but also for vacillating allies. 3 

In other words, a defensive war for limited objectives was against Russia’s 
national interest. Any war had to be total, and the military planners could 
grant no other option to the political leaders: 

Once we have been drawn into a war, we cannot conduct that war 
otherwise than with all our forces, and against both our neighbors. In 
the face of the readiness of entire armed peoples to go to war, no other 
sort of war can be envisaged than the most decisive sort — a war that 
would determine for long into the future the relative political positions 
of the European powers, and especially of Russia and Germany. 4 

However trivial the cause, war would be total; if its prelude involved only 
one neighbor, Russia should see to it that the other was drawn in. Almost 
grotesquely, the Russian general staff preferred to fight Germany and 
Austria-Hungary jointly than just one of them. A military convention car- 
rying out Obruchev’s ideas was signed on January 4, 1894. France and 
Russia agreed to mobilize together should any member of the Triple 
Alliance mobilize for any reason whatsoever. The doomsday machine 
was complete. Should Germany’s ally, Italy, mobilize against France over 
Savoy, for instance, Russia would have to mobilize against Germany; if 
Austria mobilized against Serbia, France was now obliged to mobilize 
against Germany. Since it was virtually certain that at some point some 
nation would mobilize for some cause, it was only a matter of time before 
a general war broke out, for it required only one mobilization by a major 
power to start the doomsday machinery for all of them. 


203 



Diplomacy 


At least Tsar Alexander III understood that the game now being played 
was for the highest stakes. When Giers asked him, . . what would we 
gain by helping the French destroy Germany?” he replied: “What we 
would gain would be that Germany, as such, would disappear. It would 
break up into a number of small, weak states, the way it used to be.” 5 
German war aims were equally sweeping and nebulous. The much-in- 
voked European equilibrium had turned into a battle to the death, though 
not one of the statesmen involved could have explained what cause justi- 
fied such nihilism or what political aims would be served by the confla- 
gration. 

What Russian planners were putting forward as theory, the German 
general staff translated into operational planning at almost the exact mo- 
ment that Obruchev was negotiating the Franco-Russian military alliance. 
And with German thoroughness, the imperial generals pushed the mobi- 
lization concept to its absolute extreme. The chief of the German staff, 
Alfred von Schlieffen, was as obsessed by mobilization schedules as his 
Russian and French counterparts. But whereas the Franco-Russian military 
leaders were concerned with defining the obligation to mobilize, Schlief- 
fen focused on implementing the concept. 

Refusing to leave anything to the vagaries of the political environment, 
Schlieffen tried to devise a foolproof plan for escaping Germany’s 
dreaded encirclement. Just as Bismarck’s successors had abandoned 
his complex diplomacy, so Schlieffen jettisoned the strategic concepts 
of Helmuth von Moltke, the military architect of Bismarck’s three rapid 
victories between 1864 and 1870. 

Moltke had devised a strategy that left open the option of a political 
solution to Bismarck’s nightmare of hostile coalitions. In case of a two- 
front war, Moltke planned to split the German army more or less evenly 
between the East and the West, and to go on the defensive on both fronts. 
Since France’s principal objective was to regain Alsace-Lorraine, it was 
certain to attack. If Germany defeated that offensive, France would be 
obliged to consider a compromise peace. Moltke specifically warned 
against extending military operations to Paris, having learned in the 
Franco-Prussian War how difficult it was to conclude a peace while be- 
sieging the enemy’s capital. 

Moltke proposed the same strategy for the Eastern front — namely, to 
defeat a Russian attack and to follow it by pushing the Russian army back 
to a strategically significant distance, and then to offer a compromise 
peace. Whichever forces first achieved victory would be available to aid 
the armies on the other front. In this manner, the scale of the war, 
the sacrifices, and the political solution would be kept in some son of 
balance. 6 


204 



Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 


But just as Bismarck’s successors had been uncomfortable with the 
ambiguities of his overlapping alliances, so Schlieffen rejected Moltke’s 
plan because it left the military initiative to Germany’s enemies. Nor did 
Schlieffen approve of Moltke’s preference for political compromise over 
total victory. Determined to impose terms which were, in effect, uncondi- 
tional surrender, Schlieffen elaborated a scheme for a quick and decisive 
victory on one front and then throwing all of Germany’s forces against 
the other adversary, thereby achieving a clear-cut outcome on both fronts. 
Because a quick, knockout blow in the East was precluded by the slow 
pace of Russian mobilization, which was expected to take six weeks, and 
by Russia’s vast territory, Schlieffen decided to destroy the French army 
first, before the Russian army was fully mobilized. To circumvent the 
heavy French fortifications at the German border, Schlieffen came up 
with the idea of violating Belgian neutrality by wheeling the German 
army through its territory. He would capture Paris and trap the French 
army from the rear in its fonresses along the border. In the meantime, 
Germany would stay on the defensive in the East. 

The plan was as brilliant as it was reckless. A minimum knowledge of 
history would have revealed that Great Britain would surely go to war if 
Belgium was invaded — a fact which seems to have totally eluded the 
Kaiser and the German general staff. For twenty years after the Schlieffen 
Plan was devised in 1892, Germany’s leaders had made innumerable 
proposals to Great Britain to gain its support — or at least neutrality — in 
a European war, all of which were rendered illusory by German military 
planning. There was no cause for which Great Britain had fought as 
consistently or implacably as the independence of the Low Countries. 
And Great Britain’s conduct in the wars against Louis XTV and Napoleon 
testified to its tenacity. Once engaged, it would fight to the end, even if 
France were defeated. Nor did the Schlieffen Plan allow for the possibility 
of failure. If Germany did not destroy the French army — which was possi- 
ble, since the French had interior lines and railways radiating from Paris 
whereas the German army had to march by foot in an arc through a 
devastated countryside — Germany would be forced into Moltke’s strategy 
of defense on both fronts after it had destroyed the possibility of a politi- 
cal compromise peace by occupying Belgium. Where the principal goal 
of Bismarck’s foreign policy had been to avoid a two-front war and of 
Moltke’s military strategy to limit it, Schlieffen insisted on a two-front war 
conducted in an all-out fashion. 

With German deployment focused against France while the most likely 
origin of the conflict would be in Eastern Europe, Bismarck’s nightmare 
question, “what if there is a two-front war?” was transformed into Schlief- 
fen’s nightmare question, “what if there is not a two-front war?” If France 


205 



Diplomacy 


were to declare neutrality in a Balkan war, Germany might face the dan- 
ger of a French declaration of war after Russian mobilization was com- 
plete, as Obruchev had already explained from the other side of the 
European dividing line. If, on the other hand, Germany ignored France’s 
offer of neutrality, Schlieffen’s plan would put Germany in the uncomfort- 
able position of attacking non-belligerent Belgium in order to get to non- 
belligerent France. Schlieffen therefore had to invent a reason to assault 
France should France stay on the sidelines. He created an impossible 
standard for what Germany would accept as French neutrality. Germany 
would regard France as neutral only if it agreed to cede one of its major 
fortresses to Germany — in other words, only if France put itself at Ger- 
many’s mercy and abdicated its position as a Great Power. 

The unholy mix of general political alliances and hair-trigger military 
strategies guaranteed a vast bloodletting. The balance of power had lost 
any semblance of the flexibility it had had during the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries. Wherever war erupted (and it would almost cer- 
tainly be in the Balkans), the Schlieffen Plan saw to it that the initial battles 
would be fought in the West between countries having next to no interest 
in the immediate crisis. Foreign policy had abdicated to military strategy, 
which now consisted of gambling on a single throw of the dice. A more 
mindless and technocratic approach to war would have been difficult to 
imagine. 

Though the military leaders of both sides insisted on the most destruc- 
tive kind of war, they were ominously silent about its political conse- 
quences in light of the military technology they were pursuing. What 
would Europe look like after a war on the scale they were planning? What 
changes could justify the carnage they were preparing? There was not a 
single specific Russian demand on Germany or a single German demand 
on Russia, which merited a local war, much less a general one. 

The diplomats on both sides were silent, too, largely because they did 
not understand the political implications of their countries’ time bomb, 
and because nationalistic politics in each country made them afraid to 
challenge their military establishments. This conspiracy of silence pre- 
vented the political leaders of all the major countries from requesting 
military plans which established some correspondence between military 
and political objectives. 

Considering the catastrophe they were brewing, there was something 
almost eerie about the lightheartedness of European leaders as they em- 
barked on their disastrous course. Surprisingly few warnings were ever 
uttered, an honorable exception being that of Peter Durnovo, a former 
Russian Interior Minister who became a member of the State Council. 


206 



Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 


In February 1914 — six months before the war — he wrote a prophetic 
memorandum for the Tsar: 

The main burden of the war will undoubtedly fall on us, since England 
is hardly capable of taking a considerable part in a continental war, 
while France, poor in manpower, will probably adhere to strictly defen- 
sive tactics, in view of the enormous losses by which war will be at- 
tended under present conditions of military technique. The pan of a 
battering-ram, making a breach in the very thick of the German defense, 
will be ours — 7 

In Durnovo’s judgment, these sacrifices would be wasted because Russia 
would not be able to make permanent territorial gains by fighting on the 
side of Great Britain, its traditional geopolitical opponent. Though Great 
Britain would concede gains to Russia in Central Europe, an additional 
slice of Poland would only magnify the already strong centrifugal tenden- 
cies within the Russian Empire. Adding to the Ukrainian population, said 
Durnovo, would spur demands for an independent Ukraine. Therefore, 
victory might have the ironic result of fostering enough ethnic turmoil to 
reduce the Tsar’s empire to Little Russia. 

Even if Russia realized its century-old goal of conquering the Darda- 
nelles, Durnovo pointed out that such an achievement would prove stra- 
tegically empty: 

[It] would not give us an outlet to the open sea, however, since on the 
other side of them there lies a sea consisting almost wholly of territorial 
waters, a sea dotted with numerous islands where the British navy, for 
instance, would have no trouble whatever in closing to us every inlet 
and outlet, irrespective of the Straits. 8 

Why this simple geopolitical fact should have eluded three generations 
of Russians desiring the conquest of Constantinople — and of Englishmen 
determined to thwart them — remains a mystery. 

Durnovo went on to argue that a war would bring even fewer eco- 
nomic benefits to Russia. By any calculation, it would cost far more than 
could possibly be recouped. A German victory would destroy the Russian 
economy while a Russian victory would drain the German economy, 
leaving nothing for reparations no matter which side won: 

There can be no doubt that the war will necessitate expenditures which 
are beyond Russia’s limited financial means. We shall have to obtain 
credit from allied and neutral countries, but this will not be granted 


207 



Diplomacy 


gratuitously. As to what will happen if the war should end disastrously 
for us, I do not wish to discuss now. The financial and economic conse- 
quences of defeat can be neither calculated nor even foreseen, and will 
undoubtedly spell the total ruin of our entire national economy. But 
even victory promises us extremely unfavorable financial prospects; a 
totally ruined Germany will not be in a position to compensate us for 
the cost involved. Dictated in the interest of England, the peace treaty 
will not afford Germany opportunity for sufficient economic recupera- 
tion to cover our war expenditures, even at a distant time. 9 


Yet Durnovo’s strongest reason for opposing the war was his prediction 
that war would inevitably lead to social revolution — first in the defeated 
country and then spreading from there to the victor: 

It is our firm conviction, based upon a long and careful study of all 
contemporary subversive tendencies, that there must inevitably break 
out in the defeated country a social revolution which, by the very nature 
of things, will spread to the country of the victor. 10 

There is no evidence that the Tsar saw the memorandum that might have 
saved his dynasty. Nor is there any record of a comparable analysis in 
other European capitals. The closest anyone came to Durnovo’s views 
were a few epigrammatic comments by Bethmann-Hollweg, the Chancel- 
lor who would lead Germany into the war. In 1913, already much too late, 
he had expressed, quite accurately, why German foreign policy proved so 
unsettling to the rest of Europe: 

Challenge everybody, put yourself in everybody’s path and actually 
weaken no one in this fashion. Reason: aimlessness, the need for little 
prestige successes and solicitude for every current of public opinion. 11 


That same year, Bethmann-Hollweg laid down another maxim, which 
might have saved his country had it been put into practice twenty years 
earlier: 

We must keep France in check through a cautious policy towards Russia 
and England. Naturally this does not please our chauvinists and is un- 
popular. But I see no alternative for Germany in the near future. 12 

By the time these lines were written, Europe was already headed into the 
vortex. The locale of the crisis that triggered the First World War was 


208 



Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 

irrelevant to the European balance of power, and the casus belli as acci- 
dental as the preceding diplomacy had been reckless. 

On June 28, 1914, Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Habsburg throne, paid 
for Austria’s rashness in having annexed Bosnia-Herzegovina in 1908 with 
his life. Not even the manner of his assassination could escape the singu- 
lar mix of the tragic and the absurd that marked Austria’s disintegration. 
The young Serbian terrorist failed in his first attempt to assassinate Franz 
Ferdinand, wounding the driver of the Archduke’s vehicle instead. After 
arriving at the governor’s residence and chastising the Austrian adminis- 
trators for their negligence, Franz Ferdinand, accompanied by his wife, 
decided to visit the victim at the hospital. The royal couple’s new driver 
took a wrong turn and, in backing out of the street, came to a stop in 
front of the astonished would-be assassin, who had been drowning his 
frustrations in liquor at a sidewalk cafe. With his victims so providentially 
delivered to him by themselves, the assassin did not fail a second time. 

What started out as a near-accident turned into a conflagration with the 
inevitability of a Greek tragedy. Because the Archduke’s wife was not of 
royal blood, none of the kings of Europe attended the funeral. Had the 
crowned heads of state congregated and had an opportunity to exchange 
views, they might have proven more reluctant to go to war a few weeks 
later over what had been, after all, a terrorist plot. 

In all likelihood, not even a royal summit could have prevented Austria 
from lighting the fuse which the Kaiser now rashly handed it. Remember- 
ing his promise of the previous year to back Austria in the next crisis, he 
invited the Austrian Ambassador to lunch on July 5 and urged speedy 
action against Serbia. On July 6, Bethmann-Hollweg confirmed the Kai- 
ser’s pledge: “Austria must judge what is to be done to clear up her 
relations with Serbia; but whatever Austria’s decision, she could count 
with certainty upon it, that Germany will stand behind her as an ally.” 13 

Austria at last had the blank check it had sought for so long, and a real 
grievance to which it might be applied. Insensitive as ever to the full 
implications of his bravado, William II vanished on a cruise to the Norwe- 
gian fjords (this in the days before radio). Exactly what he had in mind is 
not clear, but he obviously did not anticipate a European war. The Kaiser 
and his chancellor apparently calculated that Russia was not yet ready for 
war and would stand by while Serbia was humiliated, as it had done in 
1908. In any event, they believed they were in a better position for a 
showdown with Russia than they would be a few years later. 

Maintaining their unbroken record of misjudging the psychology of 
potential adversaries, the German leaders were now as convinced of the 
vastness of their opportunity as when they had tried to force Great Britain 


209 



Diplomacy 


into an alliance by building a large navy, or to isolate France by threaten- 
ing war over Morocco. Operating from the assumption that Austria’s suc- 
cess might break their ever-tighter encirclement by disillusioning Russia 
with the Triple Entente, they ignored France, which they deemed irrecon- 
cilable, and evaded mediation by Great Britain lest it spoil their triumph. 
They had persuaded themselves that if, against all expectations, war did 
break out, Great Britain would either remain neutral or intervene too 
late. Yet Serge Sazonov, Russia’s Foreign Minister at the outbreak of the 
war, described why Russia would not back off this time: 


Ever since the Crimean War, we could entertain no illusions on the 
subject of Austria’s feelings toward us. On the day she initiated her 
predatory policy in the Balkans, hoping thereby to prop up the tottering 
structure of her dominion, her relations with us became more and 
more unfriendly. We were able, however, to reconcile ourselves to this 
inconvenience, until it became clear that her Balkan policy had the 
sympathy of Germany, and received encouragement from Berlin . 14 


Russia felt it had to resist what it interpreted as a German maneuver to 
destroy its position among the Slavs by humiliating Serbia, its most reli- 
able ally in the area. “It was clear,” wrote Sazonov, “that we had to do not 
with the rash decision of a short-sighted Minister, undertaken at his own 
risk and on his own responsibility, but with a carefully prepared plan, 
elaborated with the aid of the German Government, without whose con- 
sent and promise of support Austria-Hungary would never have ventured 
upon its execution .” 15 

Another Russian diplomat later wrote nostalgically of the difference 
between the Germany of Bismarck and the Germany of the Kaiser-. 


The Great War was the inevitable consequence of the encouragement 
given by Germany to Austria-Hungary in her policy of penetration into 
the Balkans, which was combined with the grandiose Pan-German idea 
of a Germanized “Middle-Europe.” In Bismarck’s day this never would 
have happened. What did happen was the result of Germany’s novel 
ambition to grapple with a task more stupendous than that of Bismarck 
— without a Bismarck. 16 * 


* The Russian memoirs must be taken with a grain of salt because they were trying to shift 
the total responsibility for the war onto Germany’s shoulders. Sazonov in particular must 
bear part of the blame because he clearly belonged to the war party pushing for full 
mobilization — even though his overall analysis has much merit. 


210 



Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 


The Russian diplomats were paying the Germans too great an honor, for 
the Kaiser and his advisers had no more of a long-range plan in 1914 than 
they had had during any previous crisis, The crisis over the Archduke’s 
assassination ran out of control because no leader was prepared to back 
down and every country was concerned above all with living up to formal 
treaty obligations rather than to an overall concept of long-range common 
interest. What Europe lacked was some all-encompassing value system to 
bind the powers together, such as had existed in the Metternich system 
or the cold-blooded diplomatic flexibility of Bismarck’s Realpolitik. World 
War I started not because countries broke their treaties, but because they 
fulfilled them to the letter. 

Of the many curious aspects of the prelude to the First World War, one 
of the strangest was that nothing happened at first. Austria, true to its 
operating style, procrastinated, in part because Vienna needed time to 
overcome the reluctance of Hungarian Prime Minister Stephen Tisza to 
risk the Empire. When he finally yielded, Vienna issued a forty-eight-hour 
ultimatum to Serbia on July 23, deliberately putting forward such onerous 
conditions that they were sure to be rejected. Yet the delay had cost 
Austria the benefits of the widespread initial feelings of indignation in 
Europe over the Archduke’s assassination. 

In Metternich’s Europe, with its shared commitment to legitimacy, 
there can be little doubt that Russia would have sanctioned Austrian 
retribution against Serbia for the assassination of a prince in direct line 
of succession to the Austrian throne. But by 1914, legitimacy was no 
longer a common bond. Russia’s sympathy for its ally, Serbia, outweighed 
its outrage at the assassination of Franz Ferdinand. 

For the entire month following the assassination, Austrian diplomacy 
had been dilatory. Then came the mad rush to cataclysm in the space of 
less than a week. The Austrian ultimatum drove events out of the control 
of the political leaders. For once the ultimatum had been issued, any 
major country was in a position to trigger the irreversible race to mobili- 
zation. Ironically, the mobilization juggernaut was set off by the one 
country for which mobilization schedules were essentially irrelevant. For, 
alone among all the major powers, Austria’s military plans were still old- 
fashioned in that they did not depend on speed. It mattered little to 
Austrian war plans which week the war started, as long as its armies were 
able to fight Serbia sooner or later. Austria had delivered its ultimatum to 
Serbia in order to forestall mediation, not to speed military operations. 
Nor did Austrian mobilization threaten any other major power, since it 
would take a month to be completed. 

Thus, the mobilization schedules which made war inevitable were set 


21 1 



Diplomacy 


in motion by the country whose army did not actually start fighting until 
after the major battles in the West were already over. On the other hand 
and whatever the state of Austria’s readiness, if Russia wanted to threaten 
Austria, it would have to mobilize some troops, an act which would 
trigger the irreversible in Germany (though none of the political leaders 
seemed to have grasped this danger). The paradox of July 1914 was that 
the countries which had political reasons to go to war were not tied to 
rigid mobilization schedules while nations with rigid schedules, such as 
Germany and Russia, had no political reason to go to war. 

Great Britain, the country in the best position to arrest this chain of 
events, hesitated. It had next to no interest in the Balkan crisis, though it 
did have a major interest in preserving the Triple Entente. Dreading 
war, it feared a German triumph even more. Had Great Britain declared 
unambiguously its intentions and made Germany understand that it 
would enter a general war, the Kaiser might well have turned away from 
confrontation. That is how Sazonov saw it later: 

I cannot refrain from expressing the opinion that if in 1914 Sir Edward 
Grey had, as I insistently requested him, made a timely and equally 
unambiguous announcement of the solidarity of Great Britain with 
France and Russia, he might have saved humanity from that terrible 
cataclysm, the consequences of which endangered the very existence 
of European civilization. 17 

The British leaders were reluctant to risk the Triple Entente by indicating 
any hesitation to support their allies and, somewhat contradictorily, did 
not want to threaten Germany so as to keep open the option of mediating 
at the right moment. As a result, Great Britain fell between two stools. It 
had no legal obligation to go to war on the side of France and Russia, as 
Grey assured the House of Commons on June 11, 1914, a little more than 
two weeks before the Archduke’s assassination: 

... if war arose between European Powers, there were no unpublished 
agreements which would restrict or hamper the freedom of the Gov- 
ernment or Parliament to decide whether or not Great Britain should 
participate in a war 18 

Legally, this was certainly true. But there was an intangible moral dimen- 
sion involved as well. The French navy was in the Mediterranean because 
of France’s naval agreement with Great Britain; as a result, the coast of 
northern France would be wide open to the German navy if Great Britain 


212 



Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 


stayed out of the war. As the crisis developed, Bethmann-Hollweg 
pledged not to employ the German navy against France if Great Britain 
promised to remain neutral. But Grey refused this bargain, for the same 
reason that he had rejected the German offer in 1909 to slow down its 
naval buildup in return for British neutrality in a European war — he 
suspected that after France was defeated, Great Britain would be at Ger- 
many’s mercy. 

You must inform the German Chancellor that his proposal that we 
should bind ourselves to neutrality on such terms cannot for a moment 
be entertained. 

. . . For us to make this bargain with Germany at the expense of 
France would be a disgrace from which the good name of this country 
would never recover. 

The Chancellor also in effect asks us to bargain away whatever obliga- 
tion or interest we have as regards the neutrality of Belgium. We could 
not entertain that bargain either. 19 


Grey’s dilemma was that his country had become snared between the 
pressures of public opinion and the traditions of its foreign policy. On 
the one hand, the lack of public support for going to war over a Balkan 
issue would have suggested mediation. On the other hand, if France were 
defeated or lost confidence in the British alliance, Germany would be in 
the dominant position the British had always resisted. Therefore, it is 
highly probable that, in the end, Great Britain would have gone to war to 
prevent a French military collapse even if Germany had not invaded 
Belgium, although it could have taken some time for the British people’s 
support for the war to crystallize. During that period, Great Britain might 
have tried to mediate. However, Germany’s decision to challenge one of 
the most established principles of English foreign policy — that the Low 
Countries must not fall into the hands of a major power — served to 
resolve British doubts and guaranteed that the war would not end with a 
compromise. 

Grey reasoned that, by not taking sides in the early stages of the crisis, 
Great Britain would retain its claim to the impartiality which might permit 
it to broker a solution. And past experience supported this strategy. The 
outcome of heightened international tensions for twenty years had invari- 
ably been a conference. However, in no previous crisis had there been 
any mobilization. As all the Great Powers were getting ready to mobilize, 
the margin of time available for traditional diplomatic methods vanished. 
Thus, in the crucial ninety-six hours during which mobilization schedules 


213 



Diplomacy 


destroyed the opportunity for political maneuvering, the British Cabinet 
in effect assumed the role of bystander. 

Austria’s ultimatum backed Russia against the wall at a moment when 
it already believed it had been sorely misused. Bulgaria, whose liberation 
from Turkish rule had been brought about by Russia through several 
wars, was leaning toward Germany. Austria, having annexed Bosnia-Her- 
zegovina, seemed to be seeking to turn Serbia, Russia’s last significant 
Balkan ally, into a protectorate. Finally, with Germany establishing itself 
in Constantinople, Russia could only wonder whether the age of Pan- 
Slavism might not end in the Teutonic domination of everything it had 
coveted for a century. 

Even so, Tsar Nicholas II was not eager for a showdown with Germany. 
At a ministerial meeting on July 24, he reviewed Russia’s options. The 
Finance Minister, Peter Bark, reported the Tsar as saying: "War would be 
disastrous for the world, and once it had broken out it would be difficult 
to stop.” In addition, Bark noted, "The German Emperor had frequently 
assured him of his sincere desire to safeguard the peace of Europe.” And 
he reminded the ministers of "the German Emperor’s loyal attitude dur- 
ing the Russo-Japanese War and during the internal troubles that Russia 
had experienced afterwards.” 20 

The rebuttal came from Aleksandr Krivoshein, the powerful Minister 
of Agriculture. Demonstrating Russia’s endemic refusal to forget a slight, 
he argued that, despite the Kaiser’s kind letters to his cousin, Tsar Nicho- 
las, the German had bullied Russia during the Bosnian crisis of 1908. 
Therefore, "public and parliamentary opinion would fail to understand 
why, at the critical moment involving Russia’s vital interest, the Imperial 
Government was reluctant to act boldly. . . . Our exaggeratedly prudent 
attitudes had unfortunately not succeeded in placating the Central Euro- 
pean Powers.” 21 

Krivoshein’s argument was supported by a dispatch from the Russian 
Ambassador in Sofia to the effect that, if Russia backed down, "our pres- 
tige in the Slav world and in the Balkans would perish never to return.” 22 
Heads of government are notoriously vulnerable to arguments that ques- 
tion their courage. In the end, the Tsar suppressed his premonitions of 
disaster and opted for backing Serbia even at the risk of war, though he 
stopped short of ordering mobilization. 

When Serbia responded to Austria’s ultimatum on July 25 in an unex- 
pectedly conciliatory fashion — accepting all Austrian demands except 
one — the Kaiser, just back from his cruise, thought that the crisis was 
over. But he did not count on Austria’s determination to exploit the 
backing he had proffered so incautiously. Above all, he had forgotten — if 


214 



Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 


indeed he had ever known it — that, with the Great Powers so close to the 
brink of war, mobilization schedules were likely to outrun diplomacy. 

On July 28, Austria declared war against Serbia, even though it would 
not be ready for military action until August 12. On the same day, the Tsar 
ordered partial mobilization against Austria and discovered to his sur- 
prise that the only plan the general staff had readied was for general 
mobilization against both Germany and Austria, despite the fact that for 
the past fifty years Austria had stood in the way of Russia’s Balkan am- 
bitions, and that a localized Austro-Russian war had been a staple of 
military-staff schools during that entire period. Russia’s Foreign Minister, 
unaware that he was living in a fool’s paradise, sought to reassure Berlin 
on July 28: “The military measures taken by us in consequence of the 
Austria declaration of war . . . not a single one of them was directed 
against Germany.” 23 

The Russian military leaders, without exception disciples of Obruchev’s 
theories, were appalled by the Tsar’s restraint. They wanted general mobi- 
lization and thus war with Germany, which had taken no military steps so 
far. One of the leading generals told Sazonov that “war had become 
inevitable and that we were in danger of losing it before we had time to 
unsheath our sword.” 24 

If the Tsar had been too hesitant for his generals, he was far too 
decisive for Germany. All German war plans were based on knocking 
France out of a war within six weeks, and then turning against a presum- 
ably still not fully mobilized Russia. Any Russian mobilization — even a 
partial one — would cut into this timetable and lower the odds of Ger- 
many’s already risky gamble. Accordingly, on July 29, Germany demanded 
that Russia stop its mobilization or Germany would follow suit. And every- 
one knew that German mobilization was tantamount to war. 

The Tsar was too weak to yield. Stopping partial mobilization would 
have unraveled the entire Russian military planning, and the resistance of 
his generals convinced him that the die was cast. On July 30, Nicholas 
ordered full mobilization. On July 31, Germany once more demanded an 
end to Russian mobilization. When that request was ignored, Germany 
declared war on Russia. This occurred without a single serious political 
exchange between St. Petersburg and Berlin about the substance of the 
crisis, and in the absence of any tangible dispute between Germany and 
Russia. 

Germany now faced the problem that its war plans required an imme- 
diate attack on France, which had been quiescent throughout the crisis 
except to encourage Russia not to compromise by pledging France’s 
unconditional support. Understanding at last where twenty years of histri- 


215 



Diplomacy 


onics had landed him, the Kaiser tried to divert Germany’s mobilization 
away from France and toward Russia. His attempt to rein in the military 
was as much in vain as the Tsar’s previous, similar effort to limit the scope 
of Russian mobilization. The German general staff was no more willing 
than its Russian counterpart to scrap twenty years of planning; indeed, no 
more than the Russian staff did it have an alternate plan. Though both the 
Tsar and the Emperor had wanted to pull back from the brink, neither 
knew how to do it — the Tsar because he was prevented from carrying 
out partial mobilization, the Kaiser because he was kept from mobilizing 
only against Russia. Both were thwarted by the military machinery which 
they had helped to construct and which, once set in motion, proved 
irreversible. 

On August 1 , Germany inquired of France whether it intended to re- 
main neutral. Had France replied in the affirmative, Germany would have 
demanded the fortresses of Verdun and Toulon as tokens of good faith. 
Instead, France replied rather enigmatically that it would act in accor- 
dance with its national interest. Germany, of course, had no specific issue 
with which to justify war with France, which had been a bystander in the 
Balkan crisis. Again, the mobilization schedules were the driving force. 
Thus, Germany trumped up some French border violations and, on Au- 
gust 3, declared war. The same day, German troops, carrying out the 
Schlieffen Plan, invaded Belgium. On the next day, August 4, to the sur- 
prise of no one except the German leaders, Great Britain declared war 
on Germany. 

The Great Powers had succeeded in turning a secondary Balkan crisis 
into a world war. A dispute over Bosnia and Serbia had led to the invasion 
of Belgium, at the other end of Europe, which had in turn made Great 
Britain’s entry into the war inevitable. Ironically, by the time the decisive 
battles were being fought on the Western front, Austrian troops had still 
not taken the offensive against Serbia. 

Germany learned too late that there can be no certainty in war and that 
its obsessive quest for a quick and decisive victory had landed it in a 
draining war of attrition. In implementing the Schlieffen Plan, Germany 
dashed all its hopes for British neutrality without succeeding in destroy- 
ing the French army, which had been the purpose of taking the risks in 
the first place. Ironically, Germany lost the offensive battle in the West 
and won the defensive battle in the East, much as the elder Moltke had 
foreseen. In the end, Germany was obliged to adopt Moltke’s defensive 
strategy in the West as well after having committed itself to a policy which 
excluded the compromise political peace on which Moltke’s strategy had 
been based. 


216 



Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 


The Concert of Europe failed miserably because the political leader- 
ship had abdicated. As a result, the sort of European Congress which 
throughout most of the nineteenth century had provided a cooling-off 
period or led to an actual solution, was not even attempted. European 
leaders had provided for every contingency except the time needed for 
diplomatic conciliation. And they had forgotten Bismarck’s dictum: “Woe 
to the leader whose arguments at the end of a war are not as plausible as 
they were at the beginning.” 

By the time events had run their course, 20 million lay dead; the Austro- 
Hungarian Empire had disappeared; three of the four dynasties which 
entered the war — the German, the Austrian, and the Russian — were over- 
thrown. Only the British royal house remained standing. Afterward, it was 
hard to recall exactly what had triggered the conflagration. All that anyone 
knew was that, from the ashes produced by monumental folly, a new 
European system had to be constructed, though its nature was difficult to 
discern amidst the passion and the exhaustion deposited by the carnage. 


217 



CHAPTER NINE 


The New Face of Diplomacy: 
Wilson and the Treaty 
of Versailles 


On November 11, 1918, British Prime Minister David Lloyd George 
announced that an armistice between Germany and the Allied Powers 
had been signed with these words: “I hope that we may say that thus, this 
fateful morning, come to an end all wars.” 1 In reality, Europe was a mere 
two decades away from an even more cataclysmic war. 

Since nothing about the First World War had gone as planned, it was 
inevitable that the quest for peace would prove as futile as the expecta- 
tions with which nations had launched themselves into the catastrophe. 
Every participant had anticipated a brief war and had left the determina- 
tion of its peace terms to the sort of diplomatic congress which had ended 
European conflicts for the past century. But as the casualties mounted to 
horrendous proportions, they obliterated the political disputes of the 


218 


The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


prelude to the conflict — the competition for influence in the Balkans, the 
possession of Alsace-Lorraine, and the naval race. The nations of Europe 
came to blame their suffering on the inherent evil of their adversaries, 
and convinced themselves that compromise could bring no real peace; 
the enemy had to be totally defeated or the war fought to utter exhaustion. 

Had European leaders continued the practices of the prewar interna- 
tional order, a compromise peace would have been made in the spring of 
1915. Offensives by each side had run their bloody course, and stalemate 
prevailed on all fronts. But just as mobilization schedules had run away 
with diplomacy in the week prior to the outbreak of the war, so now the 
scale of the sacrifices stood in the way of a sensible compromise. Instead, 
the leaders of Europe kept raising their terms, thereby not only com- 
pounding the incompetence and the irresponsibility with which they had 
slid into war, but destroying the world order in which their nations had 
coexisted for nearly a century. 

By the winter of 1914-15, military strategy and foreign policy had 
lost touch with each other. None of the belligerents dared to explore a 
compromise peace. France would not settle without regaining Alsace- 
Lorraine; Germany would not consider a peace in which it would be 
asked to give up the territory it had conquered. Once plunged into war, 
the leaders of Europe became so obsessed with fratricide, so maddened 
by the progressive destruction of an entire generation of their young 
men, that victory turned into its own reward, regardless of the ruins 
on which that triumph would have to be erected. Murderous offensives 
confirmed the military stalemate and produced casualties unimaginable 
before the advent of modern technology. Efforts to enlist new allies deep- 
ened the political deadlock. For each new ally — Italy and Romania on the 
Allied side, Bulgaria on the side of the Central Powers— demanded its 
share of the anticipated booty, thereby destroying whatever flexibility 
might have remained to diplomacy. 

Peace terms gradually took on a nihilistic character. The aristocratic, 
somewhat conspiratorial style of nineteenth-century diplomacy proved 
irrelevant in the age of mass mobilization. The Allied side specialized in 
couching the war in moral slogans such as “the war to end all wars’’ or 
“making the world safe for Democracy” — especially after America en- 
tered the war. The first of these goals was understandable, if not highly 
promising, for nations that had been fighting each other in various combi- 
nations for a thousand years. Its practical interpretation was the complete 
disarmament of Germany. The second proposition — spreading democ- 
racy — required the overthrow of German and Austrian domestic institu- 
tions. Both Allied slogans therefore implied a fight to the finish. 


219 



Diplomacy 


Great Britain, which in the Napoleonic Wars had produced a blueprint 
for European equilibrium via the Pitt Plan, supported the pressures for 
an all-out victory. In December 1914, a German feeler offering to with- 
draw from Belgium in exchange for the Belgian Congo was rejected by 
British Foreign Secretary Grey with the argument that the Allies must be 
given “security against any future attack from Germany.” 2 

Grey’s comment marked a transformation in the British attitude. Until 
shortly before the outbreak of the war, Great Britain had identified its 
security with the balance of power, which it protected by supporting the 
weaker side against the stronger. By 1914, Great Britain felt less and less 
comfortable in this role. Sensing that Germany had become stronger than 
all the rest of the Continent combined, Great Britain felt it could no 
longer play its traditional role of trying to remain above the fray in Eu- 
rope. Because it perceived Germany as a hegemonic threat in Europe, a 
return to the status quo ante would do nothing to alleviate the fundamen- 
tal problem. Thus, Great Britain, too, would no longer accept compro- 
mise and insisted on its own “guarantees,” which amounted to the 
permanent weakening of Germany, especially a sharp reduction of the 
German High Sea Fleet — something Germany would never accept unless 
it were totally defeated. 

The German terms were both more precise and more geopolitical. Yet 
with their characteristic lack of a sense of proportion, the German lead- 
ers, too, asked for what amounted to unconditional surrender. In the 
West, they demanded the annexation of the coal fields of northern France 
and military control over Belgium, including the port of Antwerp, which 
guaranteed Great Britain’s implacable hostility. In the East, Germany only 
stated formal terms with respect to Poland, where, on November 5, 1916, 
it promised to create “an independent State with a hereditary and consti- 
tutional monarchy” 3 — dashing any prospect for a compromise peace with 
Russia. (Germany’s hope had been that the promise of Polish indepen- 
dence would produce enough Polish volunteers for five divisions; as it 
turned out, only 3,000 recruits showed up.) 4 After defeating Russia, Ger- 
many imposed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on March 3, 1918, by which it 
annexed a third of European Russia and established a protectorate over 
the Ukraine. In finally defining what it meant by Weltpolitik, Germany was 
opting for the domination of Europe at the very least. 

The First World War began as a typical cabinet war, with notes being 
passed from embassy to embassy, and telegrams being distributed among 
sovereign monarchs at all the decisive steps on the road to actual combat. 
But once war had been declared, and as the streets of European capitals 
filled with cheering throngs, the conflict ceased being a conflict of chan- 


220 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


celleries and turned into a struggle of the masses. After the first two years 
of the war, each side was stating terms incompatible with any notion of 
equilibrium. 

What proved beyond everyone’s imagination was that both sides would 
win and lose at the same time: that Germany would defeat Russia and 
seriously weaken both France and England; but that, in the end, the 
Western Allies, with America’s indispensable assistance, would emerge as 
the victors. The aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars had been a century of 
peace based on equilibrium and sustained by common values. The after- 
math of World War I was social upheaval, ideological conflict, and another 
world war. 

The enthusiasm that marked the beginning of the war evaporated once 
the peoples of Europe came to understand that their governments’ ability 
to produce the carnage was not matched by a commensurate ability to 
achieve either victory or peace. In the resulting maelstrom, the Eastern 
Courts, whose unity had sustained the peace of Europe in the days of the 
Holy Alliance, were overthrown. The Austro-Hungarian Empire disap- 
peared altogether. The Russian Empire was taken over by the Bolsheviks 
and for two decades receded into the periphery of Europe. Germany was 
successively racked by defeat, revolution, inflation, economic depression, 
and dictatorship. France and Great Britain did not benefit from the weak- 
ened state of their adversaries. They had sacrificed the best of their young 
men for a peace which left the enemy geopolitically stronger than it had 
been before the war. 

Before the full dimension of this largely self-inflicted debacle could 
become evident, a new player appeared on the scene to end once and 
for all what had up to this time been called the Concert of Europe. Amidst 
the rubble and the disillusionment of three years of carnage, America 
stepped into the international arena with a confidence, a power, and an 
idealism that were unimaginable to its more jaded European allies. 

America’s entry into the war made total victory technically possible, but 
it was for goals which bore little relation to the world order Europe had 
known for some three centuries and for which it had presumably entered 
the war. America disdained the concept of the balance of power and 
considered the practice of Realpolitik immoral. America’s criteria for in- 
ternational order were democracy, collective security, and self-determina- 
tion — none of which had undergirded any previous European settlement. 

To Americans, the dissonance between their philosophy and European 
thought underlined the merit of their beliefs. Proclaiming a radical depar- 
ture from the precepts and experiences of the Old World, Wilson’s idea 
of world order derived from Americans’ faith in the essentially peaceful 


221 



Diplomacy 


nature of man and an underlying harmony of the world. It followed that 
democratic nations were, by definition, peaceful; people granted self- 
determination would no longer have reason to go to war or to oppress 
others. Once all the peoples of the world had tasted of the blessings of 
peace and democracy, they would surely rise as one to defend their gains. 

European leaders had no categories of thought to encompass such 
views. Neither their domestic institutions nor their international order 
had been based on political theories postulating man’s essential good- 
ness. Rather, they had been designed to place man’s demonstrated 
selfishness in the service of a higher good. European diplomacy was 
predicated not on the peace-loving nature of states but on their propen- 
sity for war, which needed to be either discouraged or balanced. Alliances 
were formed in the pursuit of specific, definable objectives, not in the 
defense of peace in the abstract. 

Wilson’s doctrines of self-determination and collective security put Eu- 
ropean diplomats on thoroughly unfamiliar terrain. The assumption be- 
hind all European settlements had been that borders could be adjusted 
to promote the balance of power, the requirements of which took prece- 
dence over the preferences of the affected populations. This was how Pitt 
had envisaged the “great masses” to contain France at the end of the 
Napoleonic Wars. 

Throughout the nineteenth century, for example, Great Britain and 
Austria resisted the breakup of the Ottoman Empire because they were 
convinced that the smaller nations emerging from it would undermine 
international order. To their way of thinking, the smaller nations’ inexpe- 
rience would magnify endemic ethnic rivalries, while their relative weak- 
ness would tempt Great Power encroachment. In the British and Austrian 
view, the smaller states had to subordinate their national ambitions to the 
broader interests of peace. In the name of equilibrium, France had been 
prevented from annexing the French-speaking Walloon part of Belgium, 
and Germany was discouraged from uniting with Austria (though Bis- 
marck had his own reasons for not seeking a union with Austria). 

Wilson entirely rejected this approach, as the United States has done 
ever since. In America’s view, it was not self-determination which caused 
wars but the lack of it; not the absence of a balance of power that pro- 
duced instability but the pursuit of it. Wilson proposed to found peace 
on the principle of collective security. In his view and that of all his 
disciples, the security of the world called for, not the defense of the 
national interest, but of peace as a legal concept. The determination of 
whether a breach o ? peace had Indeed been committed required an 
international institution, which Wilson defined as the League of Nations. 


222 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


Oddly enough, the idea for such an organization first surfaced in Lon- 
don, heretofore the bastion of balance-of-power diplomacy. And the mo- 
tive for it was not an attempt to invent a new world order but England’s 
search for a good reason why America should enter a war of the old 
order. In September 1915, in a revolutionary departure from British prac- 
tice, Foreign Secretary Grey wrote to Wilson’s confidant, Colonel House, 
with a proposal which he believed the idealistic American President 
would not be able to refuse. 

To what extent, asked Grey, might the President be interested in a 
League of Nations committed to enforcing disarmament and to the pacific 
settlement of disputes? 

Would the President propose that there should be a League of Nations 
binding themselves to side against any Power which broke a treaty . . . 
or which refused, in case of dispute, to adopt some other method of 
settlement than that of war? 5 

It was unlikely that Great Britain, which for 200 years had steered clear 
of open-ended alliances, had suddenly developed a taste for open-ended 
commitments on a global scale. Yet Great Britain’s determination to pre- 
vail against the immediate threat of Germany was so great that its Foreign 
Secretary could bring himself to put forward a doctrine of collective 
security, the most open-ended commitment imaginable. Every member 
of his proposed world organization would have an obligation to resist 
aggression anywhere and from whatever quarter, and to penalize nations 
which rejected the pacific settlement of disputes. 

Grey knew his man. From the days of his youth, Wilson had believed 
that American federal institutions should serve as a model for an eventual 
“parliament of man”; early in his presidency, he was already exploring a 
Pan-American pact for the Western Hemisphere. Grey could not have 
been surprised — though surely he was gratified — to receive a prompt 
reply falling in with what was, in retrospect, his rather transparent hint. 

The exchange was perhaps the earliest demonstration of the “special 
relationship” between America and Great Britain that would enable Great 
Britain to maintain a unique influence in Washington long after the de- 
cline of its power in the wake of the Second World War. A common 
language and cultural heritage combined with great tactfulness to enable 
British leaders to inject their ideas into the American decision-making 
process in such a manner that they imperceptibly seemed to be a part of 
Washington’s own. Thus, when, in May 1916, Wilson advanced for the first 
time his scheme for a world organization, he was no doubt convinced 


223 



Diplomacy 


that it had been his own idea. And in a way it had been, since Grey had 
proposed it in full awareness of Wilson’s likely convictions. 

Regardless of its immediate parentage, the League of Nations was a 
quintessential^ American concept. What Wilson envisaged was a “univer- 
sal association of the nations to maintain the inviolate security of the 
highway of the seas for the common and unhindered use of all the nations 
of the world, and to prevent any war begun either contrary to treaty 
covenants or without warning and full submission of the causes to the 
opinion of the world — a virtual guarantee of territorial integrity and polit- 
ical independence.” 6 

Initially, however, Wilson refrained from offering American participa- 
tion in this “universal association.” Finally in January 1917, he took the 
leap and advocated American membership, using, amazingly enough, the 
Monroe Doctrine as a model: 

I am proposing, as it were, that the nations should with one accord 
adopt the doctrine of President Monroe as the doctrine of the world: 
that no nation should seek to extend its polity over any other nation or 
people, . . . that all nations henceforth avoid entangling alliances which 
would draw them into competitions of power 7 

Mexico was probably astonished to learn that the president of the country 
which had seized a third of its territory in the nineteenth century and had 
sent its troops into Mexico the preceding year was now presenting the 
Monroe Doctrine as a guarantee for the territorial integrity of sister na- 
tions and as a classic example of international cooperation. 

Wilson’s idealism stopped short of the belief that his views would 
prevail in Europe on their inherent merits. He showed himself quite 
prepared to supplement argument with pressure. Shortly after America 
entered the war in April 1917, he wrote to Colonel House: “When the 
war is over we can force them to our way of thinking, because by that 
time they will, among other things, be financially in our hands.” 8 For the 
time being, several of the Allies lingered over their responses to Wilson’s 
idea. Though they could not quite bring themselves to approve views so 
contrary to their traditions, they also needed America far too much to 
voice their reservations. 

In late October 1917, Wilson dispatched House to ask the Europeans 
to formulate war aims which would reflect his proclaimed aim for a peace 
without annexations or indemnities safeguarded by a world authority. For 
several months, Wilson refrained from putting forward his own views 
because, as he explained to House, France and Italy might object if 


224 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


America expressed doubts about the justice of their territorial aspira- 
tions. 9 

Finally, on January 8, 1918, Wilson proceeded on his own. With extraor- 
dinary eloquence and elevation, he put forward America’s war aims be- 
fore a joint session of Congress, presenting them in the form of Fourteen 
Points which were divided into two parts. He described eight points as 
being obligatory in the sense that they “must” be fulfilled. These included 
open diplomacy, freedom of the seas, general disarmament, the removal 
of trade barriers, impartial settlement of colonial claims, the restoration 
of Belgium, the evacuation of Russian territory, and, as the crown jewel, 
the establishment of a League of Nations. 

Wilson introduced the remaining six points, which were more specific, 
with the statement that they “should” rather than “must” be achieved, 
presumably because, in his view, they were not absolutely indispensable. 
Surprisingly, the restoration of Alsace-Lorraine to France was included in 
the non-obligatory category, even though a determination to regain that 
region had sustained French policy for half a century and through unprec- 
edented sacrifices in the war. Other “desirable” goals were described as 
autonomy for the minorities of the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Em- 
pires, readjustment of Italy’s frontiers, evacuation of the Balkans, interna- 
tionalization of the Dardanelles, and the creation of an independent 
Poland with access to the sea. Did Wilson mean to imply that these six 
conditions were subject to compromise? Poland’s access to the sea and 
the modification of Italy’s frontiers would surely be difficult to reconcile 
with the principle of self-determination and were, for this reason, the first 
flaws in the moral symmetry of Wilson’s design. 

Wilson concluded his presentation with an appeal to Germany in the 
name of the spirit of conciliation with which America would approach 
the building of a new international order — an attitude precluding histori- 
cal war aims: 

We grudge her no achievement or distinction of learning or of pacific 
enterprise such as have made her record very bright and very enviable. 
We do not wish to injure her or to block in any way her legitimate 
influence or power. We do not wish to fight her either with arms or 
with hostile arrangements of trade if she is willing to associate herself 
with us and the other peace-loving nations of the world in covenants of 
justice and law and fair dealing. We wish her only to accept a place of 
equality among the peoples of the world 10 

Never before had such revolutionary goals been put forward with so few 
guidelines as to how to implement them. The world Wilson envisaged 


225 



Diplomacy 


would be based on principle, not power; on law, not interest — for both 
victor and vanquished; in other words, a complete reversal of the histori- 
cal experience and method of operation of the Great Powers. Symbolic 
of this was the way Wilson described his and America’s role in the war. 
America had joined what, due to Wilson’s aversion to the word “ally,” he 
preferred to call ‘‘one side” of one of the most ferocious wars in history, 
and Wilson was acting as if he were the principal mediator. For what 
Wilson seemed to be saying was that the war had been fought not to 
achieve certain specific conditions but to engender a particular attitude 
on the part of Germany. Hence the war had been about conversion, not 
geopolitics. 

In an address at London’s Guildhall on December 28, 1918, after the 
Armistice, Wilson explicitly condemned the balance of power as unstable 
and based on “jealous watchfulness and an antagonism of interests”: 

They [the Allied soldiers] fought to do away with an old order and to 
establish a new one, and the center and characteristic of the old order 
was that unstable thing which we used to call the “balance of power” 

— a thing in which the balance was determined by the sword which was 
thrown in the one side or the other; a balance which was determined by 

the unstable equilibrium of the competitive interests The men who 

have fought in this war have been the men from free nations who were 
determined that that sort of thing should end now and forever. 11 

Wilson was surely right about the European nations’ having made a mess 
of things. However, it was not so much the balance of power as Europe’s 
abdication of it that had caused the debacle of World War I. The leaders 
of pre- World War I Europe had neglected the historic balance of power 
and abandoned the periodic adjustments which had avoided final show- 
downs. They had substituted a bipolar world much less flexible than even 
the Cold War world of the future, in that it lacked the cataclysmic inhibi- 
tions of the Nuclear Age. While paying lip service to equilibrium, the 
leaders of Europe had catered to the most nationalistic elements of their 
public opinion. Neither their political nor their military arrangements 
allowed for any flexibility; there was no safety valve between the status 
quo and conflagration. This had led to crises that could not be settled and 
to endless public posturing that, in the end, permitted no retreat. 

Wilson accurately identified some of the principal challenges of the 
twentieth century — most especially how to put power into the service of 
peace. But his solutions too often compounded the problems he identi- 
fied. For he ascribed competition among states primarily to the absence 


22 6 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


of self-determination and to economic motives. Yet history shows many 
other, more frequent, causes of competition, prominent among which 
are national aggrandizement and the exaltation of the ruler or the ruling 
group. Disdainful of such impulses, Wilson was convinced that the spread 
of democracy would arrest them and self-determination would deprive 
them of their focal points. 

Wilson’s remedy of collective security presupposed that the nations of 
the world would unite against aggression, injustice, and, presumably, 
excessive selfishness. In an appearance before the Senate early in 1917, 
Wilson asserted that the establishment of equal rights among states would 
provide the precondition for maintaining peace through collective secu- 
rity regardless of the power each nation represented. 

Right must be based upon the common strength, not upon the individ- 
ual strength, of the nations upon whose concert peace will depend. 
Equality of territory or of resources there of course cannot be; nor any 
other son of equality not gained in the ordinary peaceful and legitimate 
development of the peoples themselves. But no one asks or expects 
anything more than an equality of rights. Mankind is looking now for 
freedom of life, not for equipoises of power. 12 

Wilson was proposing a world order in which resistance to aggression 
would be based on moral rather than geopolitical judgments. Nations 
would ask themselves whether an act was unjust rather than whether 
it was threatening. Though America’s allies had little faith in this new 
dispensation, they felt too weak to challenge it. America’s allies knew or 
thought they knew how to calculate equilibrium based on power; they 
had no confidence that they, or anyone else, knew how to assess equilib- 
rium on the basis of moral precepts. 

Before America’s entry into the war, the European democracies never 
dared to express openly their doubts about Wilson’s ideas and indeed 
made every attempt to enlist Wilson by humoring him. By the time 
America did join the Allies, they were desperate. The combined forces of 
Great Britain, France, and Russia had not been sufficient to overcome 
Germany and, in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, they feared that 
America’s entry into the war might do no more than offset Russia’s col- 
lapse. The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Russia showed what fate Germany 
had in mind for the losers. Fear of German victory kept Great Britain and 
France from debating war aims with their idealistic American partner. 

After the Armistice, the Allies found themselves in a better position to 
express their reservations. Nor would it have been the first time that a 


227 



Diplomacy 


European alliance was strained or broken in the aftermath of victory (for 
example, the Congress of Vienna went through a phase in which the 
victors threatened each other with war). Yet the victors of the First World 
War were too drained by their sacrifices and still too dependent on the 
American giant to risk a testy dialogue with it, or its withdrawal from the 
peace settlement. 

This was especially true of France, which now found itself in a truly 
tragic position. For two centuries it had struggled to achieve the mastery 
of Europe, but, in the war’s aftermath, it no longer had confidence in its 
ability to protect even its own frontiers against a defeated enemy. French 
leaders felt instinctively that containing Germany was beyond the capacity 
of their ravaged society. War had exhausted France and the peace seemed 
to induce premonitions of further catastrophe. France, which had fought 
for its existence, now struggled for its identity. France dared not stand 
alone, yet its most powerful ally was proposing to found the peace on 
principles that turned security into a judicial process. 

Victory brought home to France the stark realization that revanche had 
cost it too dearly, and that it had been living off capital for nearly a 
century. France alone knew just how weak it had become in comparison 
with Germany, though nobody else, especially not America, was prepared 
to believe it. Thus, on the eve of victory began a Franco-American dia- 
logue which accelerated the process of French demoralization. Like Israel 
in the modern period, France masked its vulnerability with prickliness, 
and incipient panic with intransigence. And, like Israel in the modern 
period, it stood in constant danger of isolation. 

Though France’s allies insisted that its fears were exaggerated, French 
leaders knew better. In 1880, the French had represented 15.7 percent of 
Europe’s population. By 1900, that figure had declined to 9.7 percent. In 
1920, France had a population of 41 million and Germany a population 
of 65 million, causing the French statesman Briand to answer critics of 
his conciliatory policy toward Germany with the argument that he was 
conducting the foreign policy of France’s birthrate. 

France’s relative economic decline was even more dramatic. In 1850, 
France had been the largest industrial nation on the Continent. By 1880, 
German production of steel, coal, and iron exceeded that of France. In 
1913, France produced 41 million tons of coal compared with Germany’s 
279 million tons; by the late 1930s, the disparity was to widen to 47 
million tons produced by France against Germany’s total of 351 million 
tons. 13 

The residual strength of the defeated enemy marked the essential dif- 
ference between the post-Vienna and post-Versailles international orders, 


228 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


and the reason for it was the disunity of the victors after Versailles. A 
coalition of powers defeated Napoleon and a coalition of powers was 
needed to surmount imperial Germany. Even after losing, both of the 
vanquished — France in 1815 and Germany in 1918 — remained strong 
enough to overcome any one of the coalition members singly and per- 
haps even a combination of two of them. The difference was that, in 1815, 
the peacemakers at the Congress of Vienna stayed united and formed 
the Quadruple Alliance — an overwhelming coalition of four powers that 
would crush any revisionist dreams. In the post-Versailles period, the 
victors did not remain allied, America and the Soviet Union withdrew 
altogether, and Great Britain was highly ambivalent as far as France was 
concerned. 

It was not until the post-Versailles period that France came to the 
searing realization that its defeat by Germany in 1871 had not been an 
aberration. The only way France could have maintained equilibrium with 
Germany by itself would have been to break Germany up into its compo- 
nent states, perhaps by re-establishing the German Confederation of the 
nineteenth century. Indeed, France fitfully pursued this objective by en- 
couraging separatism in the Rhineland and by occupying the Saar coal 
mines. 

Two obstacles, however, stood in the way of the partitioning of Ger- 
many. For one, Bismarck had built too well. The Germany he created 
retained its sense of unity through defeats in two world wars, through the 
French occupation of the Ruhr area in 1923, and the Soviet imposition of 
a satellite state in Eastern Germany for a generation after the Second 
World War. When the Berlin Wall came down in 1989, French President 
Mitterrand briefly toyed with the idea of cooperating with Gorbachev to 
obstruct German unification. But Gorbachev was too preoccupied with 
domestic problems to undertake such an adventure, and France was not 
strong enough to attempt it alone. A similar French weakness prevented 
the partitioning of Germany in 1918. Even if France had been up to the 
task, its allies, especially America, would not have tolerated so crass a 
violation of the principle of self-determination. But neither was Wilson 
prepared to insist on a peace of reconciliation. In the end, he went 
along with several punitive provisions contradicting the equal treatment 
promised in the Fourteen Points. 

The attempt to reconcile American idealism with France’s nightmares 
turned out to be beyond human ingenuity. Wilson traded modification of 
the Fourteen Points for the establishment of the League of Nations, to 
which he looked to remedy any legitimate grievances left over from the 
peace treaty. France settled for far fewer punitive measures than it 


229 



Diplomacy 


thought commensurate with its sacrifices in the hope of evoking a long- 
term American commitment to French security. Ultimately, no country 
achieved its objective: Germany was not reconciled, France was not made 
secure, and the United States withdrew from the settlement. 

Wilson was the star of the Peace Conference, which convened in Paris 
between January and June 1919. In the days when travel to Europe took a 
week by ship, many of Wilsons advisers had warned that an American 
president could not afford to be away from Washington for months on 
end. In fact, in Wilson’s absence his strength in the Congress did deterio- 
rate, proving especially costly when the peace treaty came up for ratifica- 
tion. Wilsons absence from Washington aside, it is almost always a 
mistake for heads of state to undertake the details of a negotiation. They 
are then obliged to master specifics normally handled by their foreign 
offices and are deflected onto subjects more appropriate to their subordi- 
nates, while being kept from issues only heads of state can resolve. Since 
no one without a well-developed ego reaches the highest office, compro- 
mise is difficult and deadlocks are dangerous. With the domestic positions 
of the interlocutors so often dependent on at least the semblance of 
success, negotiations more often concentrate on obscuring differences 
than they do on dealing with the essence of a problem. 

This proved to be Wilson’s fate at Paris. With every passing month, 
he was drawn more deeply into haggling over details which had never 
concerned him before. The longer he stayed, the more the sense of 
urgency to bring matters to a conclusion overrode the desire to create an 
entirely new international order. The final outcome was made inevitable 
by the procedure used to negotiate the peace treaty. Because a dispropor- 
tionate amount of time was spent adjusting territorial questions, the 
League of Nations emerged as a sort of deus ex machina, to straighten 
out later the ever-widening gap between Wilson’s moral claims and the 
actual terms of the settlement. 

The mercurial Welshman David Lloyd George, who represented Great 
Britain, had told his public shortly before the Peace Conference that he 
would “squeeze Germany until the pips squeak.” But, confronted by a 
volatile Germany and a fretful France, he focused on maneuvering be- 
tween Clemenceau and Wilson. In the end, he went along with the puni- 
tive provisions, invoking the League as the mechanism by which any 
inequities would later be corrected. 

Arguing on behalf of France’s point of view was the battle-scarred and 
aged Georges Clemenceau. Nicknamed “the Tiger,” he was a veteran of 
decades of domestic battles, from the overthrow of Napoleon III to the 
vindication of Captain Dreyfus. Yet, at the Paris Conference, he set himself 


230 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


a task that was beyond even his ferocious capacities. Striving for a peace 
which would somehow undo Bismarck’s work and reassert Richelieu- 
style primacy on the Continent, he exceeded the tolerance of the interna- 
tional system and, indeed, the capacities of his own society. The clock 
simply could not be turned back 150 years. No other nation either shared 
or fully grasped France’s objectives. Frustration would prove to be Cle- 
menceau’s lot, and progressive demoralization France’s future. 

Vittorio Orlando, the Italian Prime Minister, represented the last of the 
“Big Four.” Though he cut a fine figure, he was frequently overshadowed 
by his energetic Foreign Minister, Sidney Sonnino. The Italian negotia- 
tors, it turned out, had come to Paris to collect their booty rather than to 
design a new world order. The Allies had induced Italy into the war by 
promising it the South Tirol and the Dalmatian coast in the Treaty of 
London of 1915. Since the South Tirol was predominantly Austro-German 
and the Dalmatian coast Slavic, Italy’s claims were in direct conflict with 
the principle of self-determination. Yet Orlando and Sonnino deadlocked 
the Conference until, in utter exasperation, South Tirol (though not Dal- 
matia) was turned over to Italy. This “compromise” demonstrated that 
the Fourteen Points were not etched in stone, and opened the floodgates 
to various other adjustments which, collectively, ran counter to the pre- 
vailing principle of self-determination without either improving the old 
balance of power or creating a new one. 

Unlike the Congress of Vienna, the Paris Peace Conference did not 
include the defeated powers. As a result, the months of negotiation cast 
the Germans beneath a pall of uncertainty, which encouraged illusions. 
They recited Wilson’s Fourteen Points as if by heart and, though their 
own peace program would have been brutal, deluded themselves into 
believing that the Allies’ final settlement would be relatively mild. There- 
fore, when the peacemakers revealed their handiwork in June 1919, the 
Germans were shocked and embarked on two decades of systematically 
undermining it. 

Lenin’s Russia, which was also not invited, attacked the entire enter- 
prise on the ground that it was a capitalist orgy organized by countries 
whose ultimate goal was to intervene in the civil war in Russia. Thus it 
happened that the peace concluding the war to end all wars did not 
include the two strongest nations of Europe — Germany and Russia — 
which, between them, contained well over half of Europe’s population 
and by far the largest military potential. That fact alone would have 
doomed the Versailles settlement. 

Nor did its procedures encourage a comprehensive approach. The 
Big Four — Wilson, Clemenceau, Lloyd George, and Orlando — were the 


231 



Diplomacy 


dominant figures, but they could not control the proceedings in the same 
way that the ministers of the Great Powers had dominated the Congress 
of Vienna a hundred years earlier. The negotiators at Vienna had concen- 
trated above all on establishing a new balance of power, for which the 
Pitt Plan had served as a general blueprint. The leaders at Paris were 
constantly being diverted by an unending series of sideshows. 

Twenty-seven states were invited. Envisioned as a forum for all the 
peoples of the world, the Conference, in the end, turned into a free- 
for-all. The Supreme Council — composed of the heads of government 
of Great Britain, France, Italy, and the United States — was the highest- 
ranking of the innumerable commissions and sections making up the 
Conference. In addition, there was the Council of Five, composed of the 
Supreme Council plus the head of government of Japan; and a Council of 
Ten, which was the Council of Five and their foreign ministers. Delegates 
from the smaller countries were free to address the more elite groups 
about their various concerns. It underlined the democratic nature of the 
Conference, but was also very time-consuming. 

Since no agenda had been agreed upon prior to the Conference, dele- 
gates arrived not knowing in what particular order the issues would be 
addressed. Thus, the Paris Conference ended up having fifty-eight differ- 
ent committees. Most of them dealt with territorial questions. A separate 
committee for each country was established. Additionally, there were 
committees dealing with war guilt and war criminals, with reparations, 
ports, waterways and railways, with labor, and, finally, with the League of 
Nations. All together, the Conference’s committee members sat through 
1,646 meetings. 

Endless discussions about peripheral subjects obscured the central fact 
that, for the peace to be stable, the settlement had to have some overarch- 
ing concept — especially a long-term view about the future role of Ger- 
many. In theory, the American principles of collective security and self- 
determination were to play that role. In practice, the real issue at the 
Conference, and one which would prove irresoluble, was the differences 
between the American concept of international order and that of the 
Europeans, particularly the French. Wilson rejected the idea that interna- 
tional conflicts had structural causes. Deeming harmony to be natural, 
Wilson strove for institutions which would sweep away the illusion of 
clashing interests and permit the underlying sense of world community 
to assert itself. 

France, the theater of many a European war and itself a participant in 
many more, was not to be persuaded that clashing national interests 
were illusory, or that there existed some nebulous, underlying harmony 


232 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


heretofore hidden from mankind. Two German occupations in the course 
of fifty years had made France obsessively fearful of another round of 
conquest. It would aspire to tangible guarantees of its security and leave 
the moral improvement of mankind to others. But tangible guarantees 
implied either a weakening of Germany or an assurance that, in the event 
of another war, other countries, especially the United States and Great 
Britain, would be on the side of France. 

Since dismembering Germany was opposed by America, and collective 
security was too nebulous for France, the only remaining solution to 
France’s problem was an American and British pledge to defend it. And 
that, precisely, was what both Anglo-Saxon countries were extremely re- 
luctant to give. With no such assurance forthcoming, France was reduced 
to pleading for expedients. Geography protected America, and the sur- 
render of the German fleet had dispersed British concerns about control 
of the seas. France alone among the victors was being asked to rest its 
security on world opinion. Andre Tardieu, a principal French negotiator, 
argued that: 

For France, as for Great Britain and the United States, it is necessary to 
create a zone of safety — This zone the naval Powers create by their 
fleets, and by the elimination of the German fleet. This zone France, 
unprotected by the ocean, unable to eliminate the millions of Germans 
trained to war, must create by the Rhine, by an inter-allied occupation 
of that river . 14 

Yet France’s demand to separate the Rhineland from Germany ran up 
against the American conviction that “such a peace would then be made 
as would be contrary to everything we have stood for .” 15 The American 
delegation argued that separating the Rhineland from Germany and sta- 
tioning Allied troops there would engender a permanent German griev- 
ance. Philip Kerr, a British delegate, told Tardieu that Great Britain 
considered an independent Rhenish state “a source of complication and 
of weakness. ... If local conflicts occur, whither will they lead? If war 
results from these conflicts, neither England nor her Dominions will have 
that deep feeling of solidarity with France which animated them in the 
last war .” 16 

French leaders were far less worried about later German grievances 
than about Germany’s ultimate power. Tardieu held his ground: 

You say that England does not like English troops to be used away from 
home. It is a question of fact. England has always had troops in India 


233 



Diplomacy 


and Egypt. Why? Because she knows that her frontier is not at Dover. 

... 7b ask us to give up occupation , is like asking England and the 
United States to sink their fleet of battleships . 17 

If France was denied a buffer, it would need some other assurance, 
preferably an alliance with Great Britain and the United States. If need 
be, France was prepared to accept an interpretation of the concept of 
collective security to achieve the same result as a traditional alliance. 

Wilson was so eager to establish the League of Nations that he occasion- 
ally put forward theories encouraging French hopes. On several occa- 
sions, Wilson described the League as an international tribunal to 
adjudicate disputes, alter boundaries, and infuse international relations 
with much-needed elasticity. One of Wilson’s advisers, Dr. Isaiah Bow- 
man, summed up Wilson’s ideas in a memorandum drafted aboard the 
ship transporting them to the Peace Conference in December 1918. The 
League would provide for: 

. . . territorial integrity plus later alteration of terms and alteration of 
boundaries if it could be shown that injustice had been done or that 
conditions had changed. And such alteration would be the easier to 
make in time as passion subsided and matters could be viewed in the 
light of justice rather than in the light of a peace conference at the close 

of a protracted war [The] opposite of such a course was to maintain 

the idea of the Great Powers and of balance of power, and such an idea 
had always produced only “ aggression and selfishness and war ” 18 

After the plenary session of February 14, 1919, at which Wilson unveiled 
the League Covenant, he spoke in nearly identical terms to his wife: “This 
is our first real step forward, for I now realize, more than ever before, 
that once established, the League can arbitrate and correct mistakes which 
are inevitable in the treaty we are trying to make at this time.” 19 

As Wilson envisaged it, the League of Nations would have the dual 
mandate of enforcing the peace and rectifying its inequities. Nevertheless, 
Wilson was gripped by a profound ambivalence. It would have been 
impossible to find a single historical example of European borders being 
changed by appeals to justice or purely legal processes; in almost every 
instance, they had been altered — or defended — in the name of the na- 
tional interest. Yet Wilson was well aware that the American people were 
not even remotely ready for a military commitment in defense of the 
provisions of the Treaty of Versailles. In essence, Wilson’s ideas translated 
into institutions tantamount to world government, which the American 
people were even less prepared to accept than a global police force. 


234 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


Wilson sought to sidestep this problem by invoking world public opin- 
ion rather than world government or military force as the ultimate sanc- 
tion against aggression. This is how he described it to the Peace 
Conference in February 1919: 

. . . throughout this instrument [the League of Nations] we are de- 
pending primarily and chiefly upon one great force, and that is the 
moral force of the public opinion of the world — 20 

And what public opinion could not resolve, economic pressure would 
surely accomplish. According to the Bowman Memorandum: 

In cases involving discipline there was the alternative to war, namely, 
the boycott; trade, including postal and cable facilities, could be denied 
a state that had been guilty of wrongdoing. 21 

No European state had ever seen such mechanisms at work or could 
bring itself to believe in their feasibility. In any case, it was too much to 
expect from France, which had expended so much blood and treasure in 
order just barely to survive, only to find itself faced with a vacuum in 
Eastern Europe and a Germany whose actual strength was much greater 
than its own. 

For France, therefore, the League of Nations had only one purpose, 
and that was to activate military assistance against Germany should that 
be needed. An ancient and by this time depleted country, France could 
not bring itself to trust in the basic premise of collective security, that all 
nations would assess threats in the same way or that, if they did, they 
would reach identical conclusions about how to resist. If collective secu- 
rity failed, America — and perhaps Great Britain — could always defend 
themselves, as a last resort, on their own. But for France, there was no 
last resort; its judgment had to prove right the first time. If the basic 
assumption of collective security turned out to be wrong, France, unlike 
America, could not fight another traditional war; it would cease to exist. 
France was therefore not seeking a general assurance, but a guarantee 
applicable to its specific circumstances. This the American delegation 
resolutely refused to give. 

Though Wilson’s reluctance to commit America to more than a declara- 
tion of principles was understandable in light of his domestic pressures, 
it magnified France’s forebodings. The United States had never hesitated 
to use force to back up the Monroe Doctrine, which Wilson constantly 
invoked as a model for his new international order. Yet America turned 


235 



Diplomacy 


coy when the issue of German threats to the European balance of power 
arose. Did this not signify that the European equilibrium was a lesser 
security interest for the United States than conditions in the Western 
Hemisphere? To remove this distinction, the French representative on 
the relevant committee, L6on Bourgeois, kept pressing for an interna- 
tional army or any other mechanism that would endow the League of 
Nations with automatic enforcement machinery in case Germany abro- 
gated the Versailles settlement — the only cause of war that interested 
France. 

For a fleeting moment, Wilson seemed to endorse the concept by 
referring to the proposed Covenant as a guarantee of the “land titles 
of the world.” 22 But Wilson’s entourage was horrified. Its members 
knew that the Senate would never ratify a standing international 
army or a permanent military commitment. One of Wilson’s advisers 
even argued that a provision stipulating the use of force to resist aggres- 
sion would be unconstitutional: 

A substantial objection to such a provision is that it would be void if 
contained in a treaty of the United States, as Congress under the Consti- 
tution had the power to declare war. A war automatically arising upon 
a condition subsequent, pursuant to a treaty provision, is not a war 
declared by Congress. 23 

Taken literally, this meant that no alliance with the United States could 
ever have binding force. 

Wilson quickly tacked back to the undiluted doctrine of collective secu- 
rity. In rejecting the French proposal, he described standby enforcement 
machinery as unnecessary because the League itself would serve to in- 
spire overwhelming confidence around the world. He maintained that 
“the only method . . . lies in our having confidence in the good faith of 
the nations who belong to the League. . . . When danger comes, we too 
will come, but you must trust us.” 24 

Trust is not a commodity in abundant supply among diplomats. When 
the survival of nations is at stake, statesmen look for more tangible guar- 
antees — especially if a country is as precariously situated as France. The 
persuasiveness of the American argument resided in the absence of an 
alternative; however ambiguous the League obligations, they were still 
better than nothing. Lord Cecil, one of the British delegates, was saying 
just that when he scolded L6on Bourgeois for his threats not to join the 
League unless the Covenant was endowed with enforcement machinery. 
“America,” Cecil told Bourgeois, “had nothing to gain from the League 


236 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 

of Nations; . . . she could let European affairs go and take care of her 
own; the offer that was made by America for support was practically a 
present to France ” 25 

Though beset by many doubts and premonitions, France finally yielded 
to the painful logic of the Briton’s argument, and acceded to the tautology 
contained in Article 10 of the League of Nations Charter: “The Council 
shall advise upon the means by which this obligation [i.e., the preserva- 
tion of territorial integrity] shall be fulfilled.” 26 That is, in case of an 
emergency, the League of Nations would agree to that on which it could 
agree. This was, of course, what the nations of the world would have 
typically done even if there had been no Covenant; and this was precisely 
the circumstance which traditional alliances sought to remedy by invok- 
ing the formal obligation of mutual assistance for specifically defined 
circumstances. 

A French memorandum bluntly stressed the inadequacy of the pro- 
posed League security arrangements: 

Suppose that instead of a defensive military understanding — very lim- 
ited indeed — which was given effect between Great Britain and France 
in 1914, there had been no other bond between the two countries than 
the general agreements contained in the Covenant of the League, the 
British intervention would have been less prompt and Germany’s vic- 
tory thereby assured. So we believe that, under present conditions, the 
aid provided for by the Covenant of the League would arrive too late. 27 

Once it had become clear that America was refusing to incorporate any 
concrete security provisions into the Covenant, France resumed its pres- 
sure for dismembering Germany. It proposed the establishment of an 
independent Rhenish republic as a demilitarized buffer zone, and sought 
to create an incentive for such a state by exempting it from reparations. 
When the United States and Great Britain balked, France suggested that, at 
a minimum, the Rhineland be separated from Germany until the League’s 
institutions had had a chance to develop and its enforcement machinery 
could be tested. 

In an effort to placate France, Wilson and the British leaders offered as 
a substitute for the dismemberment of Germany a treaty guaranteeing the 
new settlement. America and Great Britain would agree to go to war if 
Germany violated the settlement. It was very similar to the agreement 
that the allies at the Congress of Vienna had created to reinsure them- 
selves against France. But there was one important difference: after the 
Napoleonic Wars, the allies had genuinely believed in a French threat and 


237 



Diplomacy 


sought to provide security against it; after World War I, Great Britain and 
the United States did not really believe in a German threat; they offered 
their guarantee without being either convinced that it was necessary or 
particularly determined to implement it. 

The principal French negotiator was jubilant, describing the British 
guarantee as “unprecedented.” Great Britain had occasionally entered 
into temporary agreements, he maintained, but had never previously 
submitted to a permanent obligation: “She has at times lent her aid; she 
has never bound herself in advance to give it .” 28 Tardieu considered 
America’s proposed commitment an equally momentous departure from 
its historic pattern of isolationism . 29 

In their eagerness for formal guarantees, French leaders overlooked 
the crucial fact that the “unprecedented” Anglo-Saxon decisions were 
primarily a tactic to induce France to abandon its demand that Germany 
be dismembered. In foreign policy, the term “unprecedented” is always 
somewhat suspect, because the actual range of innovation is so circum- 
scribed by history, domestic institutions, and geography. 

Had Tardieu been privy to the American delegation’s reaction, he 
would have understood how tenuous the guarantee really was. Wilson’s 
advisers were unanimous in opposing their chief. Had not the new diplo- 
macy been explicitly created to do away with this type of national commit- 
ment? Had America fought the war only to end up in a traditional alliance? 
House wrote in his diary: 

I thought I ought to call the President’s attention to the perils of such a 
treaty. Among other things, it would be looked upon as a direct blow at 
the League of Nations. The League is supposed to do just what this 
treaty proposed, and if it were necessary for the nations to make such 
treaties, then why the League of Nations ? 30 

It was a fair question. For, if the League performed as advertised, the 
guarantee was unnecessary; and if the guarantee was necessary, the 
League was not living up to its design and all postwar concepts would be 
in doubt. The isolationists in the United States Senate had misgivings of 
their own. They were not so much worried that the guarantee conflicted 
with the League as that the devious Europeans were luring America into 
the web of their corrupt ancient entanglements. The guarantee did not 
last long. The Senate’s refusal to ratify the Treaty of Versailles rendered it 
moot; and Great Britain jumped at the pretext to release itself from its 
commitment as well. France’s abandonment of its claims turned out to be 
permanent, and the guarantee ephemeral. 


238 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


Out of all these crosscurrents finally emerged the Treaty of Versailles, 
named after the Hall of Mirrors of Versailles Palace in which it was signed. 
The location seemed to invite unnecessary humiliation. Fifty years earlier, 
Bismarck had tactlessly proclaimed the unified Germany there; now, the 
victors inflicted an insult of their own. Nor was their handiwork likely to 
calm the international environment. Too punitive for conciliation, too 
lenient to keep Germany from recovering, the treaty of Versailles con- 
demned the exhausted democracies to constant vigilance and to the need 
for permanent enforcement against an irreconcilable and revisionist Ger- 
many. 

The Fourteen Points notwithstanding, the Treaty was punitive in territo- 
rial, economic, and military areas. Germany had to surrender 13 percent 
of its prewar territory. Economically important Upper Silesia was handed 
over to a newly created Poland, which also received an outlet to the Baltic 
Sea and the area around Posen, thereby creating the “Polish Corridor” 
separating East Prussia from the rest of Germany. The tiny territory of 
Eupen-et-Malmedy was given to Belgium, and Alsace-Lorraine was re- 
turned to France. 

Germany lost its colonies, the legal status of which occasioned a dis- 
pute between Wilson on the one side and France, Great Britain, and Japan 
on the other, all three of which wanted to annex their share of the spoils. 
Wilson insisted that such a direct transfer would violate the principle 
of self-determination. The Allies finally arrived at the so-called Mandate 
Principle, which was as ingenious as it was hypocritical. German colonies 
as well as former Ottoman territories in the Middle East were assigned to 
the various victors with a “mandate” under League supervision, to facili- 
tate their independence. What that meant was never specifically defined, 
nor in the end did the mandates lead to independence any more rapidly 
than in other colonial areas. 

The Treaty’s military restrictions reduced the German army to 100,000 
volunteers and its navy to six cruisers and a few smaller vessels. Germany 
was forbidden to possess offensive weapons such as submarines, aircraft, 
tanks, or heavy artillery, and its general staff was dissolved. To supervise 
German disarmament, an Allied Military Control Commission was created 
and given, as it turned out, extremely vague and ineffective authority. 

Despite Lloyd George’s electioneering promise to “squeeze” Germany, 
the Allies began to realize that an economically prostrate Germany might 
produce a world economic crisis affecting their own societies. But the 
victorious populations showed little interest in the warnings of theoretical 
economists. The British and the French demanded that Germany indem- 
nify their civilian populations for all damages, Against his better judgment, 


239 



Diplomacy 


Wilson finally agreed to a provision that made Germany pay for the 
pensions of war victims and some compensation for their families. Such 
a provision was unheard of; no previous European peace treaty had ever 
contained such a clause. No figure was set for these claims; it was to be 
determined at some later date, generating a source of endless contro- 
versy. 

Other economic penalties included immediate payment of $5 billion 
in cash or in kind. France was to receive large quantities of coal as 
compensation for Germany’s destruction of its mines during the occupa- 
tion of eastern France. To make up for ships sunk by German submarines, 
Great Britain was awarded much of the German merchant fleet. Ger- 
many’s foreign assets, totaling about $7 billion, were seized, along with 
many German patents (thanks to the Versailles Treaty, Bayer Aspirin is an 
American, not a German product). Germany’s major rivers were interna- 
tionalized, and its ability to raise tariffs was restricted. 

These terms mortgaged the new international order instead of helping 
to create it. When the victors assembled in Paris, they proclaimed a new 
era in history. So eager were they to avoid what they considered the 
mistakes of the Congress of Vienna that the British delegation commis- 
sioned the renowned historian Sir Charles Webster to write a treatise on 
the subject. 31 Yet what they finally produced was a fragile compromise 
between American utopianism and European paranoia — too conditional 
to fulfill the dreams of the former, too tentative to alleviate the fears of 
the latter. An international order that can be preserved only by force is 
precarious, all the more so when the countries which must bear the 
principal burden for enforcement — in this case Great Britain and France 
— were at odds. 

It soon became apparent that, as a practical matter, the principle of self- 
determination could not be applied in the clear-cut sort of way envisaged 
by the Fourteen Points, especially among the successor states of the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire. Czechoslovakia ended up with 3 million Ger- 
mans, 1 million Hungarians, and half a million Poles out of a population 
of some 15 million; nearly a third of the total population was neither 
Czech nor Slovak. And Slovakia was not an enthusiastic part of a Czech- 
dominated state, as it would demonstrate by seceding in 1939 and again 
in 1992. 

The new Yugoslavia fulfilled the aspirations of South Slavic intellectu- 
als. But to create that state, it was necessary to cross the fault line of 
European history, which divided the Western and the Eastern Roman 
empires, the Catholic and the Orthodox religions, the Latin and the Cyril- 
lic scripts — a fault line running roughly between Croatia and Serbia, 


The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


which had never in their complex histories belonged to the same political 
unit. The bill for this came due after 1941, in a murderous civil war which 
started all over again in 1991. 

Romania acquired millions of Hungarians, Poland millions of Germans 
and the guardianship of a corridor separating East Prussia from the rest 
of Germany. At the end of this process, which was conducted in the name 
of self-determination, nearly as many people lived under foreign rule as 
during the days of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, except that now they 
were distributed across many more, much weaker, nation-states which, 
to undermine stability even further, were in conflict with each other. 

When it was too late, Lloyd George understood the dilemma into which 
the victorious Allies had maneuvered themselves. In a memorandum to 
Wilson dated March 25, 1919, he wrote: 

I can not conceive any greater cause of future war than that the German 
people, who have certainly proved themselves one of the most vigorous 
and powerful races in the world should be surrounded by a number of 
small states, many of them consisting of people who have never pre- 
viously set up a stable government for themselves, but each of them 
containing large masses of Germans clamouring for reunion with their 
native land. 32 

But by then, the conference had already progressed too far toward its 
closing date in June. Nor was any alternative principle for organizing the 
world order available, now that the balance of power had been discarded. 

Later on, many German leaders were to claim that their country had 
been tricked into the Armistice by Wilson’s Fourteen Points, which were 
then systematically violated. Such propositions were so much self-pitying 
nonsense. Germany had ignored the Fourteen Points as long as it thought 
that it had a chance of winning the war, and had, soon after the proclama- 
tion of the Fourteen Points, imposed a Carthaginian peace on Russia at 
Brest-Litovsk, violating every one of Wilson’s principles. The only reason 
Germany finally ended the war had to do with pure power calculations 
— with the American army involved, its final defeat was only a question 
of time. When it asked for an armistice, Germany was exhausted, its 
defenses were breaking, and Allied armies were about to drive into Ger- 
man territory. Wilson’s principles in fact spared Germany much more 
severe retribution. 

With better reason, historians have argued that it was the refusal of the 
United States to join the League that doomed the Treaty of Versailles. 
America’s failure to ratify the Treaty or the guarantee of French borders 


241 



Diplomacy 


connected with it certainly contributed to France’s demoralization. But, 
given the isolationist mood of the country, American membership in the 
League or ratification of the guarantee would not have made a significant 
difference. Either way, the United States would not have used force to 
resist aggression, or else it would have defined aggression in terms which 
did not apply to Eastern Europe — much as Great Britain was to do in the 
1930s. 

The debacle of the Treaty of Versailles was structural. The century of 
peace produced by the Congress of Vienna had been buttressed by three 
pillars, each of which was indispensable: a peace of conciliation with 
France; a balance of power; and a shared sense of legitimacy. The rela- 
tively conciliatory peace with France would not in itself have prevented 
French revisionism. But France knew that the Quadruple and Holy Alli- 
ances could always assemble superior power, making French expan- 
sionism far too risky. At the same time, periodic European congresses 
gave France an opportunity to participate in the Concert of Europe as an 
equal. Above all, the major countries had shared common values so that 
existing grievances did not coalesce into an attempt to overthrow the 
international order. 

The Treaty of Versailles fulfilled none of these conditions. Its terms 
were too onerous for conciliation but not severe enough for permanent 
subjugation. In truth, it was not easy to strike a balance between satisfying 
and subjugating Germany. Having considered the prewar world order 
too confining, Germany was not likely to be satisfied with any terms 
available after defeat. 

France had three strategic choices: it could try to form an anti-German 
coalition; it could seek to partition Germany; or it could try to conciliate 
Germany. All attempts to form alliances failed because Great Britain and 
America refused, and Russia was no longer part of the equilibrium. Parti- 
tioning Germany was resisted by the same countries which rejected an 
alliance but on whose support in an emergency France nevertheless had 
to rely. And it was both too late and too early for the conciliation of 
Germany — too late because conciliation was incompatible with the 
Treaty of Versailles, too early because French public opinion was not yet 
ready for it. 

Paradoxically, France’s vulnerability and Germany’s strategic advantage 
were both magnified by the Treaty of Versailles despite its punitive provis- 
ions. Before the war, Germany had faced strong neighbors in both the 
East and the West. It could not expand in either direction without encoun- 
tering a major state — France, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, or Russia. 
But after the Treaty of Versailles, there was no longer a counterweight to 


242 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 


Germany in the East. With France weakened, the Austro-Hungarian Em- 
pire dissolved, and Russia out of the picture for some time, there was 
simply no way of reconstructing the old balance of power, especially 
since the Anglo-Saxon powers refused to guarantee the Versailles settle- 
ment. 

As early as 1916, Lord Balfour, then British Foreign Secretary, foresaw 
at least a part of the danger that lay ahead for Europe when he warned 
that an independent 'Poland might leave France defenseless in another 
war: if “Poland was made an independent kingdom, becoming a buffer 
state between Russia and Germany, France would be at the mercy of 
Germany in the next war, for this reason, that Russia could not come to 
her aid without violating the neutrality of Poland” 33 — exactly the dilemma 
in 1939. To contain Germany, France needed an ally in the East that could 
force Germany to fight a two-front war. Russia was the only country 
strong enough to fulfill that role. But with Poland separating Germany 
and Russia, Russia could only pressure Germany by violating Poland. And 
Poland was too weak to play Russia’s role. What the Treaty of Versailles 
did was to give an incentive to Germany and Russia to partition Poland, 
precisely what they did twenty years later. 

Lacking a Great Power in the East with which to ally itself, France 
sought to strengthen the new states to create the illusion of a two-front 
challenge to Germany. It backed the new East European states in their 
effort to extract more territory from Germany or from what was left of 
Hungary. Obviously, the new states had an incentive to encourage the 
French delusion that they might come to serve as a counterweight to 
Germany. Yet these infant states could not possibly assume the role that, 
up to this time, Austria and Russia had played. They were too weak and 
racked by internal conflicts and mutual rivalries. And to their east loomed 
a reconstituted Russia, seething over its own territorial losses. Once it 
recovered its strength, Russia would prove as great a threat to the inde- 
pendence of the small states as Germany. 

Thus the stability of the Continent came to rest on France. It had taken 
the combined forces of America, Great Britain, France, and Russia to 
subdue Germany. Of these countries, America was again isolationist, and 
Russia was severed from Europe by a revolutionary drama and by the so- 
called cordon sanitaire of small Eastern European states standing in the 
way of direct Russian assistance to France. To preserve the peace, France 
would have, had to play policeman all over Europe. Not only had it lost 
the stomach and the strength for so interventionist a policy but, had it 
attempted one, it would have found itself alone, abandoned by both 
America and Great Britain. 


243 



Diplomacy 


The most dangerous weakness of the Versailles settlement, however, 
was psychological. The world order created by the Congress of Vienna 
had been cemented by the principle of conservative unity that had 
meshed with the requirements of the balance of power; in effect, the 
powers that were most needed to maintain the settlement also considered 
it just. The Versailles settlement was stillborn because the values it ex- 
tolled clashed with the incentives needed to enforce it: the majority of 
the states required to defend the agreement considered it unjust in one 
way or another. 

The paradox of the First World War was that it had been fought to 
curb German power and looming predominance, and that it had aroused 
public opinion to a pitch which prevented the establishment of a concilia- 
tory peace. Yet, in the end, Wilsonian principles inhibited a peace which 
curbed Germany’s power and there was no shared sense of justice. The 
price for conducting foreign policy on the basis of abstract principles is 
the impossibility of distinguishing among individual cases. Since the lead- 
ers at Versailles were not willing to reduce German power by either the 
implicit rights of victory or the calculations of the balance of power, they 
were obliged to justify German disarmament as the first installment of a 
general plan of disarmament, and reparations as an expiation of guilt for 
the war itself. 

In justifying German disarmament in this way, the Allies undermined 
the psychological readiness that was required to sustain their agreement. 
From the first, Germany could, and did, claim that it was being discrimi- 
nated against, and demanded that it either be permitted to rearm or that 
other nations disarm to its level. In the process, the disarmament provis- 
ions of the Treaty of Versailles ended up demoralizing the victors. At 
every disarmament conference, Germany would seize the moral high 
ground, in which it was usually supported by Great Britain. But if France 
did grant Germany equality in rearmament, the possibility of safeguarding 
the independence of the nations of Eastern Europe would vanish. The 
disarmament clauses were therefore bound to lead to either the disarma- 
ment of France or the rearmament of Germany. In neither case would 
France be strong enough to defend Eastern Europe or, in the long run, 
even itself. 

Similarly, the prohibition against the union of Austria and Germany 
violated the principle of self-determination, as did the presence of a large 
German minority in Czechoslovakia and, to a lesser extent, of a German 
minority in Poland. German irredentism was thus supported by the or- 
ganizing principle of the Treaty of Versailles, compounding the guilty 
conscience of the democracies. » 


244 



The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 

The gravest psychological blight on the Treaty was Article 231, the so- 
called War Guilt clause. It stated that Germany was solely responsible for 
the outbreak of World War I, and delivered a severe moral censure. 
Most of the punitive measures against Germany in the Treaty — economic, 
military, and political — were based on the assertion that the whole con- 
flagration had been entirely Germany’s fault. 

Eighteenth-century peacemakers would have regarded “war guilt 
clauses” as absurd. For them, wars were amoral inevitabilities caused by 
clashing interests. In the treaties that concluded eighteenth-century wars, 
the losers paid a price without its being justified on moral grounds. But 
for Wilson and the peacemakers at Versailles, the cause of the war of 
1914-18 had to be ascribed to some evil which had to be punished. 

When the hatreds had diminished, however, astute observers began to 
see that responsibility for the outbreak of the war was far more compli- 
cated. To be sure, Germany bore a heavy responsibility, but was it fair to 
single out Germany for punitive measures? Was Article 231 really proper? 
Once this question began being asked, especially in Great Britain in the 
1920s, the will to enforce the punitive measures against Germany con- 
tained in the Treaty began to waver. The peacemakers, assailed by their 
own consciences, wondered if what they had wrought was fair, and this 
fostered a lack of resolve in maintaining the Treaty. Germany, of course, 
was irresponsible on this issue. In German public discourse, Article 231 
became known as the “War Guilt Lie.” The physical difficulty of establish- 
ing a balance of power was matched by the psychological difficulty of 
creating a moral equilibrium. 

Thus, the framers of the Versailles settlement achieved the precise 
opposite of what they had set out to do. They had tried to weaken Ger- 
many physically but instead strengthened it geopolitically. From a long- 
term point of view, Germany was in a far better position to dominate 
Europe after Versailles than it had been before the war. As soon as Ger- 
many threw off the shackles of disarmament, which was just a matter of 
time, it was bound to emerge more powerful than ever. Harold Nicolson 
summed it up: “We came to Paris confident that the new order was about 
to be established; we left it convinced that the new order had merely 
fouled the old.”* 


245 






»iiil 


* 


M 


IliJlfj 


BI^¥^i:RIBIilS 


:••?•-•••:•; ?: m 

V&:» ; : 3s 

WMMMM 




SBHBiMjj! 

ittiSilSIiiliS^^S 

w»tesi 


'?'?'? •' ’\i.v£ 

SiilsSSSSSWisS 


CHAPTER TEN 

The Dilemmas 
of the Victors 

The policing of the Versailles agreement was based on two general 
concepts which canceled each other out. The first failed because it was 
too sweeping, the second, because it was too grudging. The concept of 
collective security was so general as to prove inapplicable to circum- 
stances most likely to disturb the peace; the informal Franco-English 
cooperation which replaced it was far too tenuous and ambivalent to 
resist major German challenges. And before five years had elapsed, the 
two powers vanquished in the war came together at Rapallo. The growing 
cooperation between Germany and the Soviet Union was a crucial blow 
to the Versailles system, something the democracies were too demoral- 
ized to grasp immediately. 


246 


The Dilemmas of the Victors 


At the end of the First World War, the age-old debate about the relative 
roles of morality and interest in international affairs seemed to have been 
resolved in favor of the dominance of law and ethics. Under the shock of 
the cataclysm, many hoped for a better world as free as possible from the 
kind of Realpolitik which, in their view, had decimated the youth of a 
generation. America emerged as the catalyst of this process even as it was 
withdrawing into isolationism. Wilson’s legacy was that Europe embarked 
on the Wilsonian course of trying to preserve stability via collective secu- 
rity rather than the traditional European approach of alliances and the 
balance of power, despite the absence of America. 

In subsequent American usage, alliances in which America participated 
(such as NATO) were generally described as instruments of collective 
security. This is not, however, how the term was originally conceived, for 
in their essence, the concepts of collective security and of alliances are 
diametrically opposed. Traditional alliances were directed against specific 
threats and defined precise obligations for specific groups of countries 
linked by shared national interests or mutual security concerns. Collective 
security defines no particular threat, guarantees no individual nation, and 
discriminates against none. It is theoretically designed to resist any threat 
to the peace, by whoever might pose it and against whomever it might be 
directed. Alliances always presume a specific potential adversary; collec- 
tive security defends international law in the abstract, which it seeks to 
sustain in much the same way that a judicial system upholds a domestic 
criminal code. It no more assumes a particular culprit than does domestic 
law. In an alliance, the casus belli is an attack on the interests or the 
security of its members. The casus belli of collective security is the viola- 
tion of the principle of “peaceful” settlement of disputes in which all 
peoples of the world are assumed to have a common interest. Therefore, 
force has to be assembled on a case-by-case basis from a shifting group 
of nations with a mutual interest in “peacekeeping.” 

The purpose of an alliance is to produce an obligation more predict- 
able and precise than an analysis of national interest. Collective security 
works in the exact opposite way. It leaves the application of its principles 
to the interpretation of particular circumstances when they arise, uninten- 
tionally putting a large premium on the mood of the moment and, hence, 
on national self-will. 

Collective security contributes to security only if all nations — or at least 
all nations relevant to collective defense — share nearly identical views 
about the nature of the challenge and are prepared to use force or apply 
sanctions on the “merits” of the case, regardless of the specific national 
interest they may have in the issues at hand. Only if these conditions are 


247 



Diplomacy 


fulfilled can a world organization devise sanctions or act as an arbiter of 
international affairs. This was how Wilson had perceived the role of col- 
lective security as the end of the war approached in September 1918: 

National purposes have fallen more and more into the background and 
the common purpose of enlightened mankind has taken their place. 
The counsels of plain men have become on all hands more simple and 
straightforward and more unified than the counsels of sophisticated 
men of affairs, who still retain the impression that they are playing a 
game of power and playing for high stakes. 1 

The fundamental difference between the Wilsonian and the European 
interpretations of the causes of international conflict is reflected in these 
words. European-style diplomacy presumes that national interests have a 
tendency to clash, and views diplomacy as the means for reconciling 
them; Wilson, on the other hand, considered international discord the 
result of “clouded thinking,” not an expression of a genuine clash of 
interests. In the practice of Realpolitik, statesmen shoulder the task of 
relating particular interests to general ones through a balance of incen- 
tives and penalties. In the Wilsonian view, statesmen are required to apply 
universal principles to specific cases. Moreover, statesmen are generally 
treated as the causes of conflict, because they are believed to distort man’s 
natural bent toward harmony with abstruse and selfish calculations. 

The conduct of most statesmen at Versailles belied Wilsonian expecta- 
tions. Without exception, they stressed their national interests, leaving the 
defense of the common purposes to Wilson, whose country in fact had 
no national interest (in the European sense) in the territorial issues of 
the settlement. It is in the nature of prophets to redouble their efforts, 
not to abandon them, in the face of a recalcitrant reality. The obstacles 
Wilson encountered at Versailles raised no doubt in his mind about the 
feasibility of his new dispensation. On the contrary, they fortified his faith 
in its necessity. And he was confident that the League and the weight of 
world opinion would correct the many provisions of the Treaty that de- 
parted from his principles. 

Indeed, the power of Wilson’s ideals was demonstrated by their impact 
on Great Britain, the motherland of the balance-of-power policy. The 
official British commentary on the League Covenant declared that “the 
ultimate and most effective sanction must be the public opinion of 
the civilised world.” 2 Or, as Lord Cecil argued before the House of Com- 
mons, “what we rely upon is public opinion . . . and if we are wrong about 
it, then the whole thing is wrong.” 3 


248 



The Dilemmas of the Victors 


It seems improbable that the scions of the policy of Pitt, Canning, 
Palmerston, and Disraeli would have come to such conclusions on their 
own. At first they went along with Wilson’s policy in order to ensure 
American support in the war. As time went on, Wilsonian principles suc- 
ceeded in capturing British public opinion. By the 1920s and 1930s, Great 
Britain’s defense of collective security was no longer tactical. Wilsonian- 
ism had made a genuine convert. 

In the end, collective security fell prey to the weakness of its central 
premise — that all nations have the same interest in resisting a particular 
act of aggression and are prepared to run identical risks in opposing it. 
Experience has shown these assumptions to be false. No act of aggression 
involving a major power has ever been defeated by applying the principle 
of collective security. Either the world community has refused to assess 
the act as one which constituted aggression, or it has disagreed over the 
appropriate sanctions. And when sanctions were applied, they inevitably 
reflected the lowest common denominator, often proving so ineffectual 
that they did more harm than good. 

At the time of the Japanese conquest of Manchuria in 1932, the League 
had no machinery for sanctions. It remedied this defect, but faced with 
Italian aggression against Abyssinia, it voted for sanctions while stopping 
short of imposing a cutoff of oil with the slogan “All sanctions short of 
war.” When Austria was forcibly united with Germany and Czechoslova- 
kia’s freedom was extinguished, there was no League reaction at all. The 
last act of the League of Nations, which no longer contained Germany, 
Japan, or Italy, was to expel the Soviet Union after it attacked Finland in 
1939. It had no effect on Soviet actions. 

During the Cold War, the United Nations proved equally ineffective in 
every case involving Great Power aggression, due to either the commu- 
nist veto in the Security Council or the reluctance on the part of smaller 
countries to run risks on behalf of issues they felt did not concern them. 
The United Nations was ineffective or at the sidelines during the Berlin 
crises and during the Soviet interventions in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, 
and Afghanistan. It was irrelevant in the Cuban Missile Crisis until the two 
superpowers agreed to settle. America was able to invoke the authority 
of the United Nations against North Korean aggression in 1950 only be- 
cause the Soviet representative was boycotting the Security Council and 
the General Assembly was still dominated by countries eager to enlist 
America against the threat of Soviet aggression in Europe. The United 
Nations did provide a convenient meeting place for diplomats and a 
useful forum for the exchange of ideas. It also performed important 
technical functions. But it failed to fulfill the underlying premise of collec- 


249 



Diplomacy 


tive security — the prevention of war and collective resistance to aggres- 
sion. 

This has been true of the United Nations even in the post-Cold War 
period. In the Gulf War of 1991, it did indeed ratify American actions, but 
resistance to Iraqi aggression was hardly an application of the doctrine of 
collective security. Not waiting for an international consensus, the United 
States had unilaterally dispatched a large expeditionary force. Other na- 
tions could gain influence over America’s actions only by joining what 
was in effect an American enterprise; they could not avoid the risks of 
conflict by vetoing it. Additionally, domestic upheavals in the Soviet Union 
and China gave the permanent members of the UN Security Council an 
incentive to maintain America’s goodwill. In the Gulf War, collective secu- 
rity was invoked as a justification of American leadership, not as a substi- 
tute for it. 

Of course, these lessons had not yet been learned in the innocent days 
when the concept of collective security was first being introduced into 
diplomacy. The post-Versailles statesmen had half-convinced themselves 
that armaments were the cause of tensions, not the result of them, and 
half-believed that if goodwill replaced the suspiciousness of traditional 
diplomacy, international conflict might be eradicated. Despite having 
been emotionally drained by the war, the European leaders should have 
realized that a general doctrine of collective security could never work, 
even if it overcame all the other hurdles it faced, as long as it excluded 
three of the most powerful nations of the world-, the United States, Ger- 
many, and the Soviet Union. For the United States had refused to join the 
League, Germany was barred from it, and the Soviet Union, which was 
treated as a pariah, disdained it. 

The country suffering most grievously under the postwar order was 
“victorious” France. French leaders knew that the provisions of the Treaty 
of Versailles would not keep Germany permanently weak. After the last 
European war — the Crimean War of 1854-56 — the victors, Great Britain 
and France, had managed to maintain the military provisions for less than 
twenty years. In the wake of the Napoleonic Wars, France became a full- 
fledged member of the European Concert after only three years. After 
Versailles, France’s decline vis-a-vis Germany grew progressively more 
evident, even as it seemed to dominate Europe militarily. France’s victori- 
ous Commander-in-Chief, Marshal Ferdinand Foch, was right when he 
said about the Treaty of Versailles: “This is not peace; it is an Armistice 
for twenty years.” 4 

By 1924, the staff of the British ground forces had reached the same 
conclusion when it predicted that Germany would again be going to war 


250 



The Dilemmas of the Victors 


with Great Britain over issues that would be “simply a repetition of the 
conditions which brought us into the late war.” 5 The restraints imposed 
by the Treaty of Versailles, it argued, would delay German rearmament 
by at most nine months once Germany felt strong enough politically to 
throw off the shackles of Versailles — which the general staff presciently 
assessed as being probable within ten years. Concurring with the analysis 
of the French, the British general staff also predicted that France would 
be helpless unless, in the meantime, it made a military alliance with “first- 
class powers.” 

Yet the only first-class power available was Great Britain, whose politi- 
cal leaders did not accept the views of their military advisers. Instead, 
their policy was based on the mistaken belief that France was already too 
powerful and that the last thing it needed was a British alliance. Great 
Britain’s leaders considered demoralized France to be the potentially 
dominant power and in need of being balanced, while revisionist Ger- 
many was perceived as the aggrieved party in need of conciliation. Both 
assumptions — that France was militarily dominant and that Germany had 
been harshly treated — were correct in the short term; but as premises of 
British policy, they were disastrous in the long term. Statesmen stand or 
fall on their perceptions of trends. And British postwar leaders failed to 
perceive the long-range dangers before them. 

France desperately wanted a military alliance with Great Britain, to 
replace the guarantee that had lapsed when the United States Senate 
refused to ratify the Versailles Treaty. Never having made a military alli- 
ance with the country they considered to be the strongest in Europe, 
British leaders now perceived France as rekindling its historic threat to 
dominate the Continent. In 1924, the Central Department of the British 
Foreign Office described the French occupation of the Rhineland as a 
“jumping-off point for an incursion into Central Europe,” 6 a judgment 
totally at variance with French psychology of the period. Even more 
inanely, the Foreign Office memorandum treated the occupation of the 
Rhineland as an encirclement of Belgium, creating “a direct menace to 
the Scheldt and Zuider Zee, and therefore an indirect menace to this 
country.” 7 Not to be outdone in generating anti -French suspicions, the 
Admiralty weighed in with an argument straight from the wars of the 
Spanish Succession or the Napoleonic Wars: that the Rhineland domi- 
nated Dutch and Belgian ports whose control would severely impair the 
British Royal Navy’s planning in the event of war with France. 8 

There was no hope whatsoever of maintaining a balance of power in 
Europe so long as Great Britain considered the primary threat to be a 
country whose nearly panicky foreign policy was geared to fending off 


251 



Diplomacy 


another German assault. Indeed, in a kind of historic reflex, many in 
Great Britain began to look to Germany to balance France. For example, 
the British Ambassador in Berlin, Viscount d’Abernon, reported that it 
was in England’s interest to maintain Germany as a counterweight to 
France. “As long as Germany is a coherent whole, there is more or less a 
balance of power in Europe,” he wrote in 1923. If Germany disintegrated, 
France would be “in undisputed military and political control, based 
upon her army and her military alliances.” 9 This was true enough but 
hardly the likely scenario that British diplomacy would confront in the 
decades ahead. 

Great Britain was right to argue, as it always had, that, after victory, the 
reconstruction of international order required the return of the erstwhile 
enemy to the community of nations. But appeasing Germany’s grievances 
would not restore stability as long as the balance of power continued to 
shift inexorably in Germany’s direction. France and Great Britain, whose 
unity was essential to maintaining the last shred of the European balance 
of power, were glaring at each other in frustration and incomprehension, 
while the real threats to the equilibrium — Germany and the Soviet Union 
— stood at the sidelines in sullen resentment. Great Britain vastly exagger- 
ated France’s strength; France vastly overestimated its ability to use the 
Treaty of Versailles to compensate for its growing inferiority vis-a-vis 
Germany. Great Britain’s fear of possible French hegemony on the Conti- 
nent was absurd; France’s belief that it could conduct foreign policy on 
the basis of keeping Germany prostrate was delusion tinged by despair. 

Perhaps the most important reason for Great Britain’s rejection of a 
French alliance was that its leaders did not in their hearts consider the 
Versailles Treaty just, least of all the settlement of Eastern Europe, and 
feared that an alliance with France, which had pacts with the Eastern 
European countries, might draw them into a conflict over the wrong 
issues and in defense of the wrong countries. Lloyd George expressed 
the conventional wisdom of that time: 

The British people . . . would not be ready to be involved in quarrels 

which might arise regarding Poland or Danzig of Upper Silesia The 

British people felt that the populations of that quarter of Europe were 
unstable and excitable; they might start fighting at any time and the 
rights and wrongs of the dispute might be very hard to disentangle. 10 

Holding attitudes such as these, British leaders used discussions about 
the possibility of a French alliance primarily as a tactical device to ease 
French pressures on Germany, not as a serious contribution to interna- 
tional security. 


252 



The Dilemmas of the Victors 


France thus continued its hopeless quest of keeping Germany weak; 
Great Britain sought to devise security arrangements to calm French fears 
without incurring a British commitment. It was a circle never to be 
squared, for Great Britain could not bring itself to extend to France 
the one assurance that might have brought about a calmer and more 
conciliatory French foreign policy toward Germany — a full military alli- 
ance. 

Realizing in 1922 that the British Parliament would never countenance 
a formal military commitment, French Prime Minister Briand reverted to 
the precedent of the Entente Cordiale of 1904 — Anglo-French diplomatic 
cooperation without military provisions. But in 1904, Great Britain had 
felt threatened by Germany’s naval program and by its constant bullying. 
By the 1920s, it feared Germany less than France, whose conduct it mis- 
takenly attributed to arrogance rather than to panic. Though Great Britain 
grudgingly acceded to Briand’s proposal, its real motive in doing so was 
reflected in a cynical Cabinet note which defended the French alliance as 
a means of strengthening Great Britain’s relations with Germany: 

Germany is to us the most important country in Europe not only on 
account of our trade with her, but also because she is the key to the 
situation in Russia. By helping Germany we might under existing condi- 
tions expose ourselves to the charge of deserting France; but if France 
was our ally no such charge could be made. 11 

Whether it was because French President Alexandre Millerand sensed the 
British evasion or simply found the arrangement too amorphous, he 
rejected Briand’s scheme, which led to the Prime Minister’s resignation. 

Frustrated in its attempt to elicit a traditional British alliance, France 
next attempted to achieve the same result through the League of Nations 
by elaborating a precise definition of aggression. This would then be 
turned into a precise obligation within the framework of the League 
of Nations— thereby transforming the League into a global alliance. In 
September 1923, at French and British urging, the League Council devised 
a universal treaty of mutual assistance. In the event of conflict, the Council 
would be empowered to designate which country’ was the aggressor and 
which the victim. Every League member would then be obliged to assist 
the victim, by force if necessary, on the continent on which that signatory 
was situated (this clarification was added to avoid incurring a League 
obligation to help in colonial conflicts). Since obligations of the doctrine 
of collective security are meant to derive from general causes rather 
than from national interests, the treaty stipulated that, to be eligible for 
assistance, the victim must have previously signed a disarmament 


253 



Diplomacy 


agreement approved by the League, and have been reducing its armed 
forces according to an agreed schedule. 

Since the victim is usually the weaker side, the Leagues Treaty of 
Mutual Assistance was in fact providing incentives for aggression by ask- 
ing the more vulnerable side to compound its difficulties. There was 
something absurd about the proposition that the international order 
would henceforth be defended on behalf of excellent disarmers rather 
than of vital national interests. Moreover, since reduction schedules of a 
general disarmament treaty would take years to negotiate, the universal 
Treaty of Mutual Assistance was creating a vast vacuum. With the League 
obligation to resist being placed into a distant and nebulous future, 
France and any other threatened country would have to face their perils 
alone. 

Despite its escape clauses, the Treaty failed to command support. The 
United States and the Soviet Union refused to consider it. Germany’s 
opinion was never solicited. Once it became clear that the draft treaty 
would have obliged Great Britain, with colonies on every continent, to 
assist any victim of aggression anywhere, Labour Prime Minister Ramsay 
MacDonald also felt obliged to report that Great Britain could not accept 
the Treaty, even though it had helped to draft it. 

By now, Frances quest for security had turned obsessive. Far from 
accepting the futility of its effort, it refused to abandon its search for 
criteria compatible with collective security, especially since the British 
government under Ramsay MacDonald so strongly supported collective 
security and disarmament — the so-called progressive causes represented 
by the League. Finally, MacDonald and the new French Prime Minister, 
Edouard Herriot, came up with a variation of the previous proposal. The 
Geneva Protocol of 1924 required League arbitration for all international 
conflicts and established three criteria for a universal obligation to assist 
victims of aggression: the aggressor’s refusal to permit the Council to 
settle the dispute by conciliation; the aggressor’s failure to submit the 
issue to judicial settlement or arbitration; and, of course, the victim’s 
membership in a scheme for general disarmament. Each signatory was 
obliged to assist the victim by all available means against the aggressor so 
defined. 12 

The Geneva Protocol, however, failed as well for the same reason as 
the Treaty of Mutual Assistance and all the other schemes for collective 
security in the 1920s had failed. It went too far for Great Britain and not 
nearly far enough for France. Great Britain had proposed it in order to 
draw France into disarmament, not to generate an additional defense 
obligation. France had pursued the Protocol primarily as an obligation of 


254 



The Dilemmas of the Victors 


mutual assistance — having only a secondary interest, if that, in disarma- 
ment. To underscore the futility of this exercise, the United States an- 
nounced that it would not honor the Geneva Protocol or tolerate any 
interference with U.S. trade under its provisions. When the chairman 
of the British Imperial Defense Staff warned that the Protocol would 
dangerously overextend British forces, the Cabinet withdrew it in early 
1925. 

It was a preposterous state of affairs. Resisting aggression had been 
made dependent on the prior disarmament of the victim. Geopolitical 
considerations and the strategic importance of the region, reasons for 
which nations had been going to war for centuries, were being deprived 
of legitimacy. According to this approach, Great Britain would defend 
Belgium because it had disarmed, not because it was strategically vital. 
After months of negotiations, the democracies were advancing neither 
disarmament nor security. The tendency of collective security to trans- 
form aggression into an abstract, legal problem and its refusal to consider 
any specific threat or commitment had a demoralizing rather than a reas- 
suring effect. 

Despite the passionate lip service it paid to the concept, Great Britain 
clearly considered the obligations of collective security less binding than 
those of traditional alliances. For the Cabinet proved to be quite fertile in 
inventing various formulae for collective security while it adamantly re- 
jected a formal alliance with France until the very eve of the war, a decade 
and a half later. Surely it would not have made such a distinction unless 
it viewed the obligations of collective security as less likely to have to be 
implemented or easier to evade than those of alliances. 

The wisest course for the Allies would have been to relieve Germany 
voluntarily of the most onerous provisions of Versailles and to forge a 
firm Franco-British alliance. This is what Winston Churchill had in mind 
when he advocated an alliance with France “if (and only if) she entirely 
alters her treatment of Germany and loyally accepts a British policy of 
help and friendship towards Germany .” 13 Such a policy was never pur- 
sued with any consistency, however. French leaders were too afraid 
of both Germany and their own public opinion, which was deeply 
hostile to Germany, and British leaders were too suspicious of French 
designs. 

The disarmament provisions of the Treaty of Versailles widened the 
Anglo-French split. Ironically, they eased Germany’s road toward military 
parity, which, given the weakness of Eastern Europe, would spell geopo- 
litical superiority in the long run. For one thing, the Allies had com- 
pounded discrimination with incompetence by neglecting to set up any 


255 



Diplomacy 


verification machinery for the disarmament provisions. In a letter to Colo- 
nel House in 1919, Andre Tardieu, a principal French negotiator at Ver- 
sailles, predicted that the failure to set up verification machinery would 
cripple the disarmament clauses of the Treaty: 

... a weak instrument is being drawn up, dangerous and absurd 

Will the League say to Germany, ‘Prove that my information is false,’ or 
even, We wish to verify.’ But then it is claiming a right of supervision, 
and Germany will reply: ‘By what right?’ 

That is what Germany will reply and she will be justified in so reply- 
ing, if she is not forced by the Treaty to recognize the right of verifica- 
tion. 14 

In the innocent days before the study of arms control had become an 
academic subject, no one thought it odd to be asking Germany to verify 
its own disarmament. To be sure, an Inter-Allied Military Control Com- 
mission had been set up. But it had no independent right of inspection; 
it could only ask the German government for information about German 
violations — not exactly a foolproof procedure. The Commission was dis- 
banded in 1926, leaving the verification of German compliance to Allied 
intelligence services. No wonder the disarmament provisions were being 
grossly violated long before Hitler refused to carry them out. 

On the political level, German leaders skillfully insisted on the general 
disarmament promised in the Versailles Treaty, of which their own disar- 
mament was to have been the first stage. With the passage of time, they 
managed to obtain British support for this proposition, and used it as 
well to justify the failure to fulfill other provisions of the Treaty. To put 
pressure on France, Great Britain announced dramatic reductions of its 
own ground forces (on which it had never relied for security), though 
not of its navy (on which, of course, it did). France’s security, on the other 
hand, depended totally on its standing army’s being significantly larger 
than Germany’s because the industrial potential of Germany and its popu- 
lation were so superior. The pressure to alter this balance — through 
either German rearmament or French disarmament — had the practical 
consequence of reversing the results of the war. By the time Hitler came 
to power, it was already quite apparent that the disarmament provisions 
of the Treaty would soon be in tatters, making Germany’s geopolitical 
advantage apparent. 

Reparations were another element of the disunity between France and 
Great Britain. Until the Versailles Treaty, it had been axiomatic that the 
vanquished paid reparations. After the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, Ger- 


256 



The Dilemmas of the Victors 


many did not feel compelled to invoke any principle other than its victory 
for the indemnity it imposed on France; nor did it do so in 1918 with 
respect to the staggering reparations bill it presented to Russia in the 
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. 

Yet, in the new world order of Versailles, the Allies had come to believe 
that reparations required a moral justification. They found it in Article 
231, or the War Guilt Clause, described in the previous chapter. The 
clause was furiously attacked in Germany, and eliminated the already low 
incentive there to cooperate with the peace settlement. 

One of the astonishing aspects of the Versailles Treaty was that its 
drafters included so invidious and precise a clause on war guilt without 
specifying the total amount to be paid in reparations. The determination 
of the reparations figure had been left to future expert commissions 
because the amount which the Allies had led their publics to expect was 
so exorbitant, it could never have survived Wilson’s scrutiny or the analy- 
sis of serious financial experts. 

In this manner, reparations, like disarmament, became a weapon of the 
German revisionists; experts increasingly doubted not only the morality 
but the feasibility of the claims. John Maynard Keynes’ Treatise on the 
Economic Consequences of the Peace was a prime example. 15 Finally, the 
bargaining position of the victor always diminishes with time. Whatever 
is not exacted during the shock of defeat becomes increasingly difficult 
to attain later — a lesson America had to learn with respect to Iraq at the 
end of the 1991 Gulf War. 

It was not until 1921 — two years after the signing of the Versailles 
Treaty — that a figure for reparations was finally established. It was ab- 
surdly high: 132 billion Goldmarks (some $40 billion, which amounts to 
approximately $323 billion in present value), a sum which would have 
necessitated German payments for the rest of the century. Predictably, 
Germany claimed insolvency; even if the international financial system 
could have accommodated such a vast transfer of resources, no demo- 
cratic German government could have survived agreeing to it. 

In the summer of 1921, Germany paid the first installment of the repa- 
rations bill, transferring 1 billion Marks ($250 million). But it did so by 
printing paper Marks and selling them for foreign currency on the open 
market — in other words, by inflating its currency to the point where no 
significant transfer of resources was taking place. At the end of 1922, 
Germany proposed a four-year moratorium on reparations. 

The demoralization of the Versailles international order and of France, 
its leading European pillar, was now far advanced. No enforcement ma- 
chinery existed for reparations, and no verification machinery for disar- 


257 



Diplomacy 


advocated the policy of “no war, no peace.” 19 Yet the weaker side has 
the option of playing for time only against an adversary that considers 
negotiations as operating according to their own internal logic — an illu- 
sion to which the United States has been especially subject. The Germans 
had no such views. When Trotsky returned with instructions proclaiming 
a policy of neither peace nor war and announced unilaterally that the war 
was over, the Germans resumed military operations. Faced with total 
defeat, Lenin and his colleagues accepted Hoffmann’s terms and signed 
the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, accepting coexistence with imperial Germany. 

The principle of coexistence would be invoked time and again over 
the next sixty years by the Soviets, with the reactions of the protagonists 
remaining constant: the democracies would each time hail the Soviet 
proclamation of peaceful coexistence as a sign of conversion to a perma- 
nent policy of peace. Yet, for their part, communists always justified peri- 
ods of peaceful coexistence on the ground that the relation of forces was 
not conducive to confrontation. The obvious corollary was that, as that 
relationship changed, so would the Bolsheviks’ devotion to peaceful co- 
existence. According to Lenin, it was reality which dictated coexistence 
with the capitalist foe: 

By concluding a separate peace, we are freeing ourselves in the largest 
measure possible at the present moment from both warring imperialist 
groups; by utilizing their mutual enmity we utilize the war, which 
makes a bargain between them against us difficult. 20 

The high point of that policy was, of course, the Hitler-Stalin Pact of 1939. 
Potential inconsistencies were easily rationalized. “We are convinced,” 
said a communist statement, “that the most consistent socialist policy can 
be reconciled with the sternest realism and most level-headed practical- 
ity.” 21 

In 1920, Soviet policy took the final step in acknowledging the need 
for a more traditional policy toward the West when Foreign Minister 
Georgi Chicherin said: 

There may be differences of opinion as to the duration of the capitalist 
system, but at present the capitalist system exists, so that a modus 
vivendi must be found 22 

Despite the revolutionary rhetoric, in the end national interest emerged 
as a dominant Soviet goal, becoming elevated into a socialist verity just 
as it had stood for so long at the core of the policies of the capitalist 


260 



The Dilemmas of the Victors 


states. Survival was now the immediate goal and coexistence the 
tactic. 

Yet the socialist state soon confronted another military threat when, in 
April 1920, it was attacked by Poland. Polish forces reached the neighbor- 
hood of Kiev before they were defeated. When the Red Army, in a coun- 
terthrust, approached Warsaw, the Western Allies intervened, demanding 
an end to the offensive and peace. British Foreign Secretary Lord Curzon 
proposed a dividing line between Poland and Russia which the Soviets 
were prepared to accept. Poland, however, refused, so the final settlement 
was made along the prewar military lines, far to the east of what Curzon 
had proposed. 

Poland thus managed to sharpen the antagonism of its two historic 
enemies: Germany, from which it had acquired Upper Silesia and the 
Polish corridor; and the Soviet Union, from which it had seized the terri- 
tory east of what became known as the Curzon Line. When the smoke 
cleared, the Soviet Union found itself free at last of wars and revolution, 
yet having paid for it with the loss of most of the tsars’ conquests in the 
Baltic, Finland, Poland, Bessarabia, and along the Turkish frontier. By 
1923, Moscow had reclaimed control of Ukraine and Georgia, which 
had seceded from the Russian Empire during the turmoil — an event not 
forgotten by many contemporary Russian leaders. 

To restore domestic control, the Soviet Union had to make a pragmatic 
compromise between revolutionary crusades and Realpolitik, between 
the proclamation of world revolution and the practice of peaceful coexis- 
tence. Though it opted to defer world revolution, the Soviet Union was 
far from a supporter of the existing order. It saw in peace an opportunity 
to pit the capitalists against each other. Its particular target was Ger- 
many, which had always played a major role in Soviet thought and in 
Russian sentiment. In December 1920, Lenin described the Soviet strat- 
egy: 

Our existence depends, first, on the existence of a radical split in the 
camp of the imperialist powers and, secondly, on the fact that the 
victory of the Entente and the Versailles peace have thrown the vast 
majority of the German nation into a position where they cannot live. 

. . . The German bourgeois government madly hates the Bolsheviks, but 
the interests of the international situation are pushing it towards peace 
with Soviet Russia against its own will. 23 

Germany was coming to the same conclusion. During the Russo-Polish 
war, General Hans von Seeckt, the architect of the postwar German army, 
had written: 


261 



Diplomacy 


The present Polish state is a creation of the Entente. It is to replace 
the pressure formerly exercised by Russia on the eastern frontier of 
Germany. The fight of Soviet Russia with Poland hits not only the latter, 
but above all the Entente — France and Britain. If Poland collapses the 
whole edifice of the Versailles Treaty totters. From this it follows clearly 
that Germany has no interest in rendering any help to Poland in her 
struggle with Russia. 24 

Von Seeckt’s view confirmed the fears aired by Lord Balfour a few years 
earlier (and quoted in the last chapter) — that Poland gave Russia and 
Germany a common enemy and obviated their balancing one another, as 
they had done throughout the nineteenth century. In the Versailles sys- 
tem, Germany faced not a Triple Entente but a multitude of states in 
various stages of disagreement with each other, all of them opposed as 
well by a Soviet Union with territorial grievances very similar to Ger- 
many’s. It was only a matter of time before the two outcasts pooled their 
resentments. 

The occasion arose in 1922 at Rapallo, an Italian seaside town near 
Genoa, and the site of Lloyd George’s international conference. Ironically, 
it was made possible by the constant haggling over reparations that had 
been going on since the Treaty of Versailles, and that had intensified after 
the presentation of the Allied reparations bill and Germany’s claim that it 
was unable to pay. 

A major obstacle to the conference’s success was that Lloyd George had 
neither the power nor the wisdom with which Secretary of State George 
Marshall would later steer his own reconstruction program to fruition. At 
the last moment, France refused to permit the subject of reparations to 
be included in the agenda, fearing, quite correctly, that France would be 
pressed to reduce the total amount. It seemed that France prized above 
all its unfulfillable, albeit internationally recognized, claim to some attain- 
able compromise. Germany was looking for a moratorium on reparations. 
The Soviets were suspicious that the Allies might try to end the impasse 
by linking tsarist debts to German reparations, whereby the Soviet Union 
would be asked to acknowledge the tsars’ debts and to reimburse itself 
from German reparations. Article 116 of the Treaty of Versailles had left 
open precisely this possibility. 

The Soviet government had no more intention of acknowledging tsarist 
debts than it did of recognizing British and French financial claims. Nor 
was it anxious to add Germany to its already extensive list of adversaries 
by joining the reparations merry-go-round. In order to prevent the Genoa 
Conference from resolving this issue to the Soviets’ disadvantage, Moscow 
proposed in advance of the conference that the two pariahs establish 


262 



The Dilemmas of the Victors 


diplomatic relations and mutually renounce all claims against each other. 
Not wanting to be the first European country to establish diplomatic 
relations with the Soviet Union and thereby possibly jeopardize its 
chances of obtaining relief from the reparations bill, Germany evaded the 
proposition. The proposal remained on the table until events at Genoa 
forced a change of attitude. 

Soviet Foreign Minister Georgi Chicherin, an aristocrat by birth who 
became a passionate believer in the Bolshevik cause, relished the oppor- 
tunity provided by Genoa to put revolutionary convictions into the service 
of Realpolitik. He proclaimed “peaceful coexistence” in terms which 
placed practical cooperation above the requirements of ideology: 

. . . the Russian delegation recognize that in the present period of his- 
tory, which permits the parallel existence of the old social order and of 
the new order now being born, economic collaboration between the 
States representing these two systems of property is imperatively neces- 
sary for the general economic reconstruction . 25 

At the same time, Chicherin coupled the appeal for cooperation with 
proposals well designed to compound the confusion of the democracies, 
He spelled out an agenda so sweeping that it could neither be imple- 
mented nor ignored by democratic governments — a tactic that would 
remain a constant of Soviet diplomacy. This agenda included the abolition 
of weapons of mass destruction, a world economic conference, and inter- 
national control of all waterways. The purpose was to mobilize Western 
public opinion and to give Moscow a reputation for peaceful internation- 
alism which would make it difficult for the democracies to organize the 
anticommunist crusade which was the Kremlin’s nightmare. 

Chicherin found himself an outsider at Genoa, though no more so than 
the members of the German delegation. The Western Allies remained 
oblivious to the temptations they were creating for both Germany and 
the Soviet Union by pretending that these two most powerful countries 
on the Continent could simply be ignored. Three requests by the German 
Chancellor and his Foreign Minister for a meeting with Lloyd George 
were rebuffed. Simultaneously, France proposed holding private consul- 
tations with Great Britain and the Soviet Union from which Germany 
would be excluded. The purpose of these meetings was to resurrect the 
shopworn scheme of trading tsarist debts for German reparations — a 
proposal which even less suspicious diplomats than the Soviets would 
have construed as a trap to undermine the prospect of improved German- 
Soviet relations. 


263 



Diplomacy 


By the end of the first week of the conference, both Germany and the 
Soviet Union were worried that they would be pitted against each other. 
When one of Chicherin’s aides telephoned the German delegation at 
the conspiratorial hour of one-fifteen in the morning on April 16, 1922, 
proposing a meeting later that day at Rapallo, the Germans jumped at the 
invitation. They were anxious to end their isolation as much as the Soviets 
wanted to avoid the dubious privilege of becoming German creditors. 
The two foreign ministers lost little time drafting an agreement in which 
Germany and the Soviet Union established full diplomatic relations, re- 
nounced claims against each other, and granted each other Most Favored 
Nation status. Lloyd George, upon receiving belated intelligence of the 
meeting, frantically tried to reach the German delegation to invite them 
to the interview he had repeatedly rejected. The message reached Ra- 
thenau, the German negotiator, as he was about to leave for the signing 
of the Soviet-German agreement. He hesitated, then muttered: “Le vin est 
tire-, il faut le boire” (The wine is drawn; it must be drunk). 26 

Within a year, Germany and the Soviet Union were negotiating secret 
agreements for military and economic cooperation. Though Rapallo later 
came to be a symbol of the dangers of Soviet-German rapprochement, it 
was in fact one of those fateful accidents which seem inevitable only in 
retrospect: accidental in the sense that neither side planned for it to 
happen when it did; inevitable because the stage for it had been set by 
the Western Allies’ ostracism of the two largest Continental countries, by 
their creation of a belt of weak states between them hostile to each, and 
by their dismemberment of both Germany and the Soviet Union. All of 
this created the maximum incentive for Germany and the Soviet Union 
to overcome their ideological hostility and to cooperate in undermining 
Versailles. 

Rapallo by itself did not have that consequence; it symbolized, how- 
ever, a common overriding interest which continued to draw together 
Soviet and German leaders for the remainder of the interwar period. 
George Kennan has ascribed this agreement in part to Soviet persistence, 
in part to Western disunity and complacency. 27 Clearly, the Western de- 
mocracies were shortsighted and fatuous. But once they had made the 
error of drafting the Treaty of Versailles, only extremely forbidding 
choices were left to them. In the long run, Soviet-German cooperation 
could have been forestalled only by a British and French deal with one 
or the other of them. But the minimum price of such a deal with Germany 
would have been the rectification of the Polish border and, almost cer- 
tainly, the abolition of the Polish Corridor. In such a Europe, France could 
only have avoided German domination by a firm alliance with Great 


264 



The Dilemmas of the Victors 


Britain, which, of course, the British refused to consider. Similarly, the 
practical implication of any deal with the Soviet Union would have been 
the restoration of the Curzon Line, which Poland would have rejected 
and France would not consider. The democracies were not prepared to 
pay either price, or even to admit to the dilemma of how to defend the 
Versailles settlement without allowing either Germany or the Soviet 
Union a significant role. 

This being the case, there was always the possibility that the (wo Conti- 
nental giants might opt to partition Eastern Europe between themselves 
rather than join a coalition directed against the other. Thus it remained 
to Hitler and Stalin, unfettered by the past and driven by their lusts for 
power, to blow away the house of cards assembled by the well-meaning, 
peace-loving, and essentially timid statesmen of the interwar period. 


265 



CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Stresemann and the 
Re-emergence of the 
Vanquished 


All the principles of balance-of-power diplomacy as they had been prac- 
ticed in Europe since William III would have commanded that Great 
Britain and France form an anti-German alliance to rein in the revisionist 
impulses of their restless neighbor. Ultimately, Great Britain and France 
were each weaker than Germany — even a defeated Germany — and could 
hope to counterbalance it only in coalition. But that coalition was never 
formed. Great Britain abandoned the single-minded pursuit of equilib- 
rium that had distinguished its policy for three centuries. It oscillated 
between a superficial application of the balance of power, which it aimed 
at France, and a growing devotion to the new principle of collective 
security, which it recoiled from enforcing. France pursued a foreign pol- 


266 


Stresemann and the Re-emercence of the Vanquished 


icy of desperation, alternating between using the Treaty of Versailles to 
delay German recovery and making halfhearted attempts to reconcile its 
ominous neighbor. Thus it happened that the statesman destined to do 
the most to shape the diplomatic landscape of the 1920s — Gustav Stre- 
semann — came not from one of the victorious powers, but from defeated 
Germany. 

But before the emergence of Stresemann, there was to be one more 
doomed effort by France to assure its security by its own efforts. At 
the end of 1922, with reparations elusive, disarmament controversial, 
meaningful British security guarantees unavailable, and German-Soviet 
rapprochement taking place, France found itself at the end of its emo- 
tional tether. Raymond Poincare, its wartime President, took over as Prime 
Minister and decided in favor of unilateral enforcement of the Versailles 
reparations clause. In January 1923, French and Belgian troops occupied 
the Ruhr, Germany’s industrial heartland, without consulting the other 
Allies. 

Lloyd George would remark many years later: “If there had been no 
Rapallo, there would have been no Ruhr.” 1 But it is also true that, had 
Great Britain been prepared to undertake a security guarantee, France 
would not have embarked on so desperate a step as occupying Germany’s 
industrial heartland. And if France had been more ready to compromise 
on reparations (and on the disarmament issue), Great Britain might have 
been more forthcoming about forging an alliance — though how mean- 
ingful this alliance would have been, given the near-pacifist state of British 
public opinion, is another matter. 

Ironically, France’s sole unilateral military initiative demonstrated that 
it had in fact lost the capacity to act alone. France took control of the 
industries of the Ruhr region in order to exploit its steel and coal as a 
substitute for the reparations payments refused by the Germans. The 
German government ordered passive resistance and paid the coal and 
steel workers not to work. Though the policy bankrupted the German 
government— and sparked hyperinflation — it also prevented France 
from achieving its objective, thereby turning the occupation of the Ruhr 
into a massive French failure. 

France was now thoroughly isolated. The United States expressed its 
displeasure by withdrawing its own army of occupation from the Rhine- 
land. Great Britain glowered. Germany saw in this split between the 
Allies an opportunity for rapprochement with Great Britain. The heady 
atmosphere of national resistance to the French occupation even led 
some German leaders to resurrect the old project of an Anglo-German 
alliance — another instance of Germany’s ingrained tendency to overesti- 
mate its options. The British Ambassador to Berlin, Lord d’Abernon, re- 


267 



Diplomacy 


ported a conversation in which a leading German statesman resurrected 
some of the arguments of imperial Germany for a British alliance, declar- 
ing that “the position of 1914 is today reversed. It is quite clear that, as in 
1914 England had fought Germany to withstand a military domination of 
Europe, so in the course of a few years she might fight France on the 
same grounds. The question is whether England would carry on that fight 
alone or whether she would have allies.” 2 

No responsible British leader thought of going so far as allying his 
country with Germany. Nevertheless, on August 11, 1923, Foreign Secre- 
tary Curzon and Foreign Office official Sir Eyre Crowe (author of the 
Crowe Memorandum of 1907) demanded that France reconsider its 
course in the Ruhr at the risk of losing Great Britain’s support in a future 
crisis with Germany. Poincare was not impressed. He did not consider 
British support a favor to France but, rather, a requirement of the British 
national interest: “. . . in case a situation like in 1914 develops . . . England, 
in its own interest, will have to take the same measure as she took back 
then.” 3 

Poincare turned out to be right about what Great Britain’s ultimate 
choice would be when faced with a situation similar to that of 1914. But 
he miscalculated as to the amount of time it would take Great Britain to 
realize it was indeed facing a similar crisis and that, in the interim, the 
rickety Versailles system would be in a shambles. 

The occupation of the Ruhr ended in the fall of 1923. France did not 
succeed in generating a significant separatist movement in the Ruhr or 
even in the Rhineland, which, according to the terms of the Versailles 
Treaty, the German army was not permitted to enter and therefore could 
not go into to quell a separatist movement. The coal mined during the 
occupation barely paid for the costs of administering the territory. In the 
meantime, Germany was beset by insurrections developing in Saxony 
(from the political left) and in Bavaria (from the right). Inflation raged, 
threatening the ability of the German government to carry out any of its 
obligations. France’s insistence on full reparations had become unful- 
fil lab le as a result of French actions. 

France and Great Britain had managed to checkmate each other: 
France, by insisting on weakening Germany by unilateral action and 
thereby forfeiting British support; Great Britain, by insisting on concilia- 
tion without considering its impact on the balance of power, thereby 
forfeiting French security. Even a disarmed Germany proved strong 
enough to thwart unilateral French actions — an augury of what lay ahead 
once Germany threw off the shackles of Versailles. 

In the 1920s, whenever the democracies came to a dead end, they 
would invoke the League of Nations rather than face geopolitical realities. 


268 



Stresemann and the Re-emercence of the Vanquished 


Even the British general staff fell into this trap. The very memorandum 
quoted in the previous chapter that had identified Germany as the princi- 
pal threat and deemed France incapable of offering effective resistance, 
fell in with the prevailing orthodoxies: in its conclusions, the general staff 
had no better idea than “strengthening” the League (whatever that meant) 
and making “alliances ad hoc in such situations as . . . Germany running 
amok.” 4 

That recommendation was a nearly guaranteed prescription for failure. 
The League was too divided and, by the time Germany ran amok, it would 
be too late to organize alliances. Now, all Germany needed to ensure for 
itself an even more commanding long-term position than it had enjoyed 
before the war was a statesman sufficiently farsighted and patient to erode 
the discriminatory provisions of the Treaty of Versailles. 

Such a leader emerged in 1923, when Gustav Stresemann became 
Foreign Minister and then Chancellor. His method for renewing Ger- 
many’s strength was the so-called policy of “fulfillment,” which amounted 
to a total reversal of previous German policy and the abandonment of the 
diplomatic guerrilla war his predecessors had waged against the provi- 
sions of the Versailles Treaty. “Fulfillment” relied on taking advantage of 
the obvious discomfort of Great Britain and France with the distance 
between their principles and the terms of Versailles. In return for a 
German effort to meet an eased reparations schedule, Stresemann strove 
to be released from the most onerous political and military provisions of 
Versailles by the Allies themselves. 

A nation defeated in war and partially occupied by foreign troops has 
basically two choices. It can challenge the victor in the hope of making 
enforcement of the peace too painful; or it can cooperate with the victor 
while regaining strength for a later confrontation. Both strategies contain 
risks. After a military defeat, resistance invites a test of strength at the 
moment of maximum weakness; collaboration risks demoralization, be- 
cause policies which appeal to the victor also tend to confuse the public 
opinion of the vanquished. 

Before Stresemann, Germany had pursued the policy of resistance. 
Confrontational tactics had enabled it to prevail in the Ruhr crisis, but 
Germany’s grievances were hardly allayed by the French withdrawal from 
the Ruhr. Strangely enough, the return of Alsace-Lorraine to France was 
not controversial. But the redrawing of Germany’s borders, giving Poland 
large tracts of German territory, faced passionate nationalistic opposition. 
Finally, there were widespread pressures to throw off the restrictions on 
German military strength. And there was nearly unanimous consensus in 
Germany that the Allied reparations demands were outrageous. 

Unlike the nationalists, Stresemann understood that no matter how 


269 



Diplomacy 


unpopular the Versailles Treaty — indeed, regardless of how much he 
hated it himself — he needed British and, to some extent, French help to 
throw off its most onerous provisions. The Rapallo understanding had 
been a useful tactic to unnerve the Western democracies. But because the 
Soviet Union was too impoverished to aid German economic recovery 
and too isolated to lend support in most diplomatic confrontations, its 
real impact would be felt only after Germany became strong enough to 
challenge the Versailles settlement openly. Above all, regaining economic 
strength required foreign loans, something Germany would find difficult 
in an atmosphere of confrontation. Thus, Stresemann’s policy of fulfill- 
ment reflected above all his realistic assessment of the requirements 
of German political and economic recovery: “Germany’s basic military 
weakness,” he wrote, “spells out the limits, the nature, and the methods 
of Germany’s foreign policy.” 5 

Though the fulfillment policy was grounded in realism, that commodity 
was in no more abundant supply in postwar Germany (especially in 
conservative circles) than it had been in the days when the conservatives’ 
policies had so heavily contributed to the outbreak of World War I. End- 
ing the war while German forces still stood on Allied soil had enabled 
those responsible for Germany’s participation in the war to escape the 
consequences of their folly, and to saddle their more moderate succes- 
sors with the blame. Lloyd George had foreseen this result when, on 
October 26, 1918, he commented to the War Cabinet about Germany’s 
first peace overtures: 

The Prime Minister said that industrial France had been devastated and 
Germany had escaped. At the first moment when we were in a position 
to put the lash on Germany’s back she said “I give up.” The question 
arose whether we ought not to continue lashing her as she had lashed 
France. 6 

His colleagues, however, thought Great Britain too exhausted to pursue 
such a course. Foreign Secretary Austen Chamberlain replied wearily that 
“vengeance was too expensive these days.” 7 

As Lloyd George had predicted, the new Weimar Republic was from 
the outset besieged by nationalist agitators, even though it had been 
granted peace terms far more generous than what the military high com- 
mand could have obtained. Germany’s new democratic leaders received 
no credit for preserving their country’s substance under the most difficult 
of circumstances. In politics, however, there are few rewards for mitigat- 
ing damage because it is rarely possible to prove that worse conse- 
quences would in fact have occurred. 


270 



Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 


Just as, two generations later, it took a conservative American president 
to engineer America’s opening to China, only a leader with the impecca- 
ble conservative credentials of Stresemann could have even thought of 
basing German foreign policy on cooperating, however ambivalently, 
with the hated Versailles settlement. The son of a beer distributor, 
Stresemann was bom in Berlin in 1878 and had built his political career 
by espousing the views of the conservative, pro-business bourgeois Na- 
tional Liberal Party. He became its leader in 1917. A man of great convi- 
viality, he loved literature and history, and his conversations were 
frequently sprinkled with allusions to German classics. Nevertheless, 
his early views on foreign policy reflected the conventional conserva- 
tive wisdom. For example, he was convinced that Germany had been 
lured into the war by a jealous Great Britain eager to preserve its own 
primacy. 

As late as 1917, Stresemann had advocated vast conquests in both the 
East and the West, as well as the annexation of French and British colonial 
possessions in Asia and Africa. He had also supported unrestricted subma- 
rine warfare, the calamitous decision which brought America into the 
war. That the man who had called the Treaty of Versailles “the greatest 
swindle in history'” 8 should initiate a policy of fulfillment seems a strange 
turn of events only to those who believe that Realpolitik cannot teach the 
benefits of moderation. 

Stresemann was the first postwar German leader — and the only demo- 
cratic leader — who exploited the geopolitical advantages which the Ver- 
sailles settlement conferred on Germany. He grasped the essentially 
brittle nature of the Franco-English relationship, and used it to widen the 
wedge between the two wartime allies. He cleverly exploited the British 
fear of a German collapse vis-a-vis both France and the Soviet Union. An 
official British analyst described Germany as a crucial bulwark against the 
spread of Bolshevism, using arguments which would show that “fulfill- 
ment” was making progress. The German government was “supported 
by [a] majority of National Assembly, is genuinely democratic, intends to 
carry out [the] Treaty of Peace to [the] best of its ability, and is deserving 
[of] frank support from Allies.” If British support failed, Germany “will 
inevitably gravitate toward Bolshevism now and ultimately perhaps to 
absolute monarchism again.” 9 

Great Britain’s arguments in favor of assistance to Germany bear a 
certain resemblance to American propositions regarding aid to Russia 
in the Yeltsin period. In neither case was there an assessment of the 
consequences of the “success” of the policy being advocated. If fulfill- 
ment succeeded, Germany would become progressively stronger and be 


271 



Diplomacy 


in a position to threaten the equilibrium of Europe. Similarly, if a post- 
Cold War international aid program to Russia achieves its objective, grow- 
ing Russian strength will produce geopolitical consequences all around 
the vast periphery of the former Russian Empire. 

In both cases, the advocates of conciliation had positive, even far- 
sighted, goals. The Western democracies were wise to go along with 
Stresemann’s fulfillment policy. But they erred in not tightening the 
bonds among themselves. The policy of fulfillment was bound to bring 
closer the day described by General von Seeckt: “We must regain our 
power, and as soon as we do, we will naturally take back everything we 
lost.” 10 America was farsighted in offering aid to post-Cold War Russia; 
but once Russia recovers economically, its pressure on neighboring 
countries is certain to mount. This may be a price worth paying, but it 
would be a mistake not to recognize that there is a price. 

In the early stages of his fulfillment policy, Stresemann’s ultimate aims 
were irrelevant. Whether he was seeking permanent conciliation or an 
overthrow of the existing order — or, as was most likely, keeping both 
options open — he first had to free Germany from the controversy over 
reparations. With the exception of France, the Allies were equally eager 
to put the issue behind them and to begin receiving some reparations at 
last. As for France, it hoped to escape from the self-inflicted trap of having 
occupied the Ruhr. 

Stresemann skillfully proposed international arbitration for a new 
schedule of reparations, expecting an international forum to prove less 
exacting than France alone was likely to be. In November 1923, France 
accepted the appointment of an American banker, Charles G. Dawes, as 
“impartial arbiter” to reduce France’s reparation claim — a galling symbol 
of the disintegration of the wartime alliance. The Dawes Committee’s 
recommendations establishing a reduced schedule of payments for five 
years were accepted in April 1924. 

Over the next five years, Germany paid out about $1 billion in repara- 
tions and received loans of about $2 billion, much of it from the United 
States. In effect, America was paying Germany’s reparations, while Ger- 
many used the surplus from American loans to modernize its industry. 
France had insisted on reparations in order to keep Germany weak. 
Forced to choose between a weak Germany and a Germany capable of 
paying reparations, France had opted for the latter, but then had to stand 
by as reparations helped to rebuild Germany’s economic and, ultimately, 
its military power. 

By the end of 1923, Stresemann was in a position to claim some suc- 
cess: 


272 



Stresemann and the Re-emercence of the Vanquished 


All our measures of a political and diplomatic nature, through deliber- 
ate co-operation by the two Anglo-Saxon Powers, the estrangement of 
Italy from her neighbour [France], and the vacillation of Belgium, have 
combined to create a situation for France that the country will not in 
the long run be able to sustain . 11 

Stresemann’s assessment was accurate. The fulfillment policy produced 
an insoluble quandary for both France and the entire European order. 
French security required a certain amount of discrimination against Ger- 
many in the military field; otherwise, Germany’s superior potential in 
manpower and resources would prevail. But without equality — the right 
to build armaments like any other European country — Germany would 
never accept the Versailles system, and fulfillment would come to a halt. 

Fulfillment placed British diplomats in a difficult position as well. If 
Great Britain did not grant Germany military equality as a quid pro quo 
for Germany’s meeting its reparations payments, Germany could well 
revert to its earlier intransigence. But military equality for Germany 
would imperil France. Great Britain might have made an alliance with 
France to counterbalance Germany, but it did not wish to become entan- 
gled in France’s alliances in Eastern Europe or to find itself at war with 
Germany over some piece of Polish or Czech territory. “For the Polish 
Corridor,” said Austen Chamberlain in 1925, paraphrasing Bismarck’s 
remark about the Balkans, “no British government ever will or ever can 
risk the bones of a British grenadier.” 12 His prediction, like Bismarck’s, 
was disproved by events: Great Britain did go to war — just as Germany 
had earlier in the century — and for the very cause it had so consistently 
disdained. 

To avoid this dilemma, Austen Chamberlain in 1925 developed an idea 
for a limited alliance among Great Britain, France, and Belgium which 
would guarantee only their borders with Germany — in essence a military 
alliance to resist German aggression in the West. By this time, however, 
Stresemann’s fulfillment policy had made such headway that he held a 
near-veto over Allied initiatives. To forestall Germany’s being identified 
as the potential aggressor, he declared that a pact without Germany was 
a pact against Germany. 

Half-convinced that Germany’s fear of encirclement had contributed to 
its bellicose prewar policy, Chamberlain retreated to a curious hybrid 
agreement in which he sought to blend a traditional alliance with the 
new principle of collective security. In keeping with the alliance concept 
originally proposed, the new pact — signed at Locarno, Switzerland — 
guaranteed the borders between France, Belgium, and Germany against 


273 



Diplomacy 


aggression. True to the principle of collective security, the draft presumed 
neither aggressor nor victim but promised resistance against aggression 
from whatever quarter in either direction. The casus belli was no longer 
an aggressive act by a specific country but the violation of a legal norm 
by any country. 

By the mid-1920s, Stresemann, the Minister of defeated Germany, was 
in the driver’s seat much more than Briand and Chamberlain, the repre- 
sentatives of the victors. In return for renouncing revisionism in the West, 
Stresemann drew from Briand and Chamberlain an implicit recognition 
that the Versailles Treaty required revision in the East. Germany accepted 
its Western frontier with France and Belgium, and the permanent demili- 
tarization of the Rhineland; Great Britain and Italy guaranteed this ar- 
rangement, pledging assistance to repel invasions across the frontiers or 
into the demilitarized Rhineland from whatever direction. At the same 
time, Stresemann refused to accept Germany’s border with Poland, which 
the other signatories also refused to guarantee. Germany concluded arbi- 
tration agreements with its Eastern neighbors, pledging peaceful settle- 
ment of all disputes. Yet Great Britain refused to extend its guarantee 
even to that pledge. Finally, Germany agreed to enter the League of 
Nations, thereby assuming a general obligation to settle all disputes by 
peaceful means, which, in theory, included the unrecognized borders in 
the East. 

The Locarno Pact was greeted with exuberant relief as the dawning of a 
new world order. The three foreign ministers — Aristide Briand of France, 
Austen Chamberlain of Great Britain, and Gustav Stresemann of Germany 
— received the Nobel Peace Prize. But amidst all the jubilation, no one 
noticed that the statesmen had sidestepped the real issues; Locarno had 
not so much pacified Europe as it had defined the next battlefield. 

The reassurance felt by the democracies at Germany’s formal recogni- 
tion of its Western frontier showed the extent of the demoralization and 
the confusion that had been caused by the melange of old and new views 
on international affairs. For in that recognition was implicit that the Treaty 
of Versailles, which had ended a victorious war, had been unable to 
command compliance with the victors’ peace terms, and that Germany 
had acquired the option of observing only those provisions which it 
chose to reaffirm. In this sense, Stresemann’s unwillingness to recognize 
Germany’s Eastern frontiers was ominous; while Great Britain’s refusal to 
guarantee even the arbitration treaties gave international sanction to two 
classes of frontier in Europe — those accepted by Germany and guaran- 
teed by the other powers, and those neither accepted by Germany nor 
guaranteed by the other powers. 


274 



Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 


To confuse matters further, three tiers of commitments now prevailed 
in Europe. The first consisted of traditional alliances backed by the con- 
ventional machinery of staff talks and political consultations. No longer in 
vogue, these were confined to French arrangements with the weak new 
states in Eastern Europe — alliances which Great Britain refused to join. 
In the event of German aggression in Eastern Europe, France would 
face a choice between undesirable alternatives: abandoning Poland and 
Czechoslovakia, or fighting alone, which had been its recurring night- 
mare since 1870 and was not something it was very likely to undertake. 
The second tier consisted of special guarantees such as Locarno, obvi- 
ously deemed less binding than formal alliances, which explains why they 
never encountered obstacles in the House of Commons. Finally, there 
was the League of Nations’ own commitment to collective security, which 
was in practice devalued by Locarno. For, if collective security was in fact 
reliable, Locarno was unnecessary; and if Locarno was necessary, the 
League of Nations was, by definition, inadequate to assure the security of 
even its principal founding members. 

Because neither the Locarno-type guarantee nor the general concept of 
collective security identified a potential aggressor, both rendered advance 
military planning impossible. Even if concerted military action had been 
possible — and there is no example of it during the League period — the 
bureaucratic machinery guaranteed endless delays for fact-finding and 
various other League conciliation procedures. 

All of these unprecedented diplomatic stipulations compounded the 
uneasiness of the countries which considered themselves most threat- 
ened. Italy ended up guaranteeing frontiers along the Rhine, which it had 
never in its history identified with national security. Italy’s primary inter- 
est in Locarno had been to gain recognition as a Great Power. Having 
achieved that goal, it saw no reason to run any actual risks — as it would 
amply demonstrate when the Rhine frontier was challenged ten years 
later. For Great Britain, Locarno signified the first agreement in which a 
major power simultaneously guaranteed an erstwhile ally and a recently 
defeated enemy while pretending to be impartial between them. 

Locarno represented not so much reconciliation between France and 
Germany as endorsement of the military outcome of the recent war. 
Germany had been defeated in the West but had overcome Russia in 
the East. Locarno in effect confirmed both results and laid the basis for 
Germany’s ultimate assault on the Eastern settlement. 

Locarno, hailed in 1925 as turning the corner toward permanent peace, 
in fact marked the beginning of the end of the Versailles international 
order. From then on, the distinction between victor and vanquished be- 


275 



Diplomacy 


came more and more murky — a situation which could have been benefi- 
cial had the victor gained from it a heightened sense of security or the 
defeated become reconciled to living with a modified settlement. Neither 
occurred. France’s frustration and sense of impotence grew with every 
passing year. So did nationalist agitation in Germany. The wartime Allies 
had all abdicated their responsibilities — America shirked its role in de- 
signing the peace, Great Britain renounced its historic role as balancer, 
and France relinquished its responsibility as guardian of the Versailles 
settlement. Only Stresemann, leader of a defeated Germany, had a long- 
range policy, and he inexorably moved his country to the center of the 
international stage. 

The sole remaining hope for a peaceful new world order was that the 
emotional lift of the agreement itself and the expectations it produced, as 
summed up in the slogan “the spirit of Locarno,” might overcome its 
structural failings. Contrary to Wilson’s teachings, it was not the broad 
masses which promoted this new atmosphere but the foreign ministers 
— Chamberlain, Briand, and Stresemann — of the countries whose suspi- 
cions and rivalries had produced the war and prevented the consolidation 
of the peace. 

Since there was no geopolitical basis for the Versailles order, the states- 
men were driven to invoking their personal relationships as a means of 
maintaining it — a step none of their predecessors had ever taken. The 
aristocrats who had conducted foreign policy in the nineteenth century 
belonged to a world in which intangibles were understood in the same 
way. Most of them were comfortable with each other. Nevertheless, they 
did not believe that their personal relations could influence their assess- 
ments of their countries’ national interests. Agreements were never justi- 
fied by the “atmosphere” they generated, and concessions were never 
made to sustain individual leaders in office. Nor did leaders address each 
other by their first names as a way of underlining their good relations 
with each other for the sake of their publics’ opinions. 

That style of diplomacy changed after World War I. Since then, the 
trend toward personalizing relations has accelerated. When Briand wel- 
comed Germany to the League, he stressed Stresemann’s human qualities, 
and Stresemann responded in kind. Similarly, Austen Chamberlain’s 
alleged personal predilection for France caused Stresemann to accelerate 
his policy of fulfillment and to recognize Germany’s Western border 
when Chamberlain replaced the more pro-German Lord Curzon as for- 
eign secretary in 1924. 

Austen Chamberlain was the scion of a distinguished family. The son 
of the brilliant and mercurial Joseph Chamberlain, advocate of an alliance 


276 



Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 


with Germany early in the century, he was the half-brother of Neville 
Chamberlain, who was to make the Munich settlement. Like his father, 
Austen wielded massive power in Great Britain’s coalition governments. 
But, also like his father, he never reached the highest office; indeed, he 
was the only leader of the Conservative Party in the twentieth century 
who did not become prime minister. As one quip had it, Austen “always 
played the game, and always lost it.’’ Harold Macmillan said of Austen 
Chamberlain: “He spoke well, but never in the grand style. He was clear, 
but not incisive. ... He was respected, but never feared.” 13 

Chamberlain’s major diplomatic accomplishment was his role in forg- 
ing the Locarno Pact. Because Chamberlain was known to be a Franco- 
phile, having once remarked that he “loved France like a woman,” Stre- 
semann feared an incipient Franco-English alliance. It was this fear that 
moved Stresemann to originate the process that led to Locarno. 

In retrospect, the weakness of the policy of creating two classes of 
frontiers in Europe has become obvious. But Chamberlain viewed it as a 
crucial extension of Great Britain’s strategic commitments, which went to 
the limit of what the British public would support. Until the beginning of 
the eighteenth century, Great Britain’s security frontier had been at the 
Channel. Throughout the nineteenth century, the security frontier had 
been at the borders of the Low Countries. Austen Chamberlain tried to 
extend it to the Rhine, where, in the end, it was not supported when 
Germany challenged it in 1936. A guarantee to Poland was beyond the 
ken of British statesmen in 1925. 

Aristide Briand was a classic political leader of the Third Republic. 
Starting his career as a left-wing firebrand, he became a fixture in French 
Cabinets — occasionally as prime minister but more frequently as foreign 
minister (he served in fourteen governments in that capacity). He recog- 
nized early on that France’s relative position vis-a-vis Germany was declin- 
ing and concluded that reconciliation with Germany represented France’s 
best hope for long-term security. Relying on his convivial personality, he 
hoped to relieve Germany of the most onerous provisions of the Treaty 
of Versailles. 

Briand’s policy could not be popular in a country devastated by Ger- 
man armies. Nor is it at all easy to determine to what extent Briand’s was 
an attempt to end a century-old enmity or whether it represented a reluc- 
tant Realpolitik. In times of crisis, Frenchmen preferred the tough and 
austere Poincare, who insisted on rigid enforcement of Versailles. When 
crises became too painful to sustain — as after the occupation of the Ruhr 
— Briand would re-emerge. The trouble with this constant alternation 
was that France lost the capacity to pursue the policies of either of these 


277 



Diplomacy 


two antipodal figures to their logical conclusions: France was no longer 
strong enough to carry out Poincare’s policy, yet French public opinion 
gave Briand too little to offer to Germany to achieve permanent reconcili- 
ation. 

Whatever his ultimate motives, Briand understood that, if France did 
not pursue conciliation, it would be extorted from it by Anglo-Saxon 
pressure and by Germany’s growing strength. Stresemann, though an 
ardent opponent of the Treaty of Versailles, believed that a relaxation of 
tensions with France would speed revision of the disarmament clauses 
and lay the basis for a revision of Germany’s eastern borders. 

On September 27, 1926, Briand and Stresemann met in the quaint 
village of Thoiry, in the French Jura Mountains near Geneva. Germany 
had just been admitted to the League of Nations and welcomed by a 
warm, eloquent, and personal speech from Briand. In this heady atmo- 
sphere, the two statesmen worked out a package deal designed to settle 
the war once and for all. France would return the Saar without the plebi- 
scite called for by the Treaty of Versailles. French troops would evacuate 
the Rhineland within a year, and the Inter-Allied Military Control Commis- 
sion (IMCC) would be withdrawn from Germany. In return, Germany 
would pay 300 million Marks for the Saar mines, speed up reparations 
payments to France, and fulfill the Dawes Plan. Briand was in effect offer- 
ing to trade the most invidious provisions of Versailles for help with 
French economic recovery. The agreement demonstrated the unequal 
bargaining position of the two sides. Germany’s gains were permanent 
and irrevocable; France’s benefits were one-time, transitory, financial con- 
tributions, some of which repeated what Germany had previously prom- 
ised. 

The agreement ran into problems in both capitals. German nationalists 
violently opposed any form of cooperation with Versailles, however ad- 
vantageous the specific terms, and Briand was accused of throwing away 
the Rhineland buffer. There were further difficulties with the bond issue 
for financing additional German expenditures. On November 11, Briand 
abruptly broke off the talks, declaring that “the prompt fulfillment of the 
Thoiry idea had been crushed by technical obstacles.” 14 

This was the last attempt at a general settlement between France and 
Germany in the interwar period. Nor is it clear whether it would have 
made all that much difference had it been implemented. For the basic 
question posed by Locarno diplomacy remained — whether conciliation 
would cause Germany to accept the Versailles international order or 
accelerate Germany’s capacity to threaten it. 

After Locarno, that question became increasingly moot. Great Britain 


278 



Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 


was convinced that conciliation was the only practical course. America 
believed it was a moral imperative as well. Strategic or geopolitical analy- 
sis having become unfashionable, the nations talked about justice even 
while they strenuously disagreed about its definition. A spate of treaties 
affirming general principles and appeals to the League followed — partly 
from conviction, partly from exhaustion, and partly from the desire to 
avoid painful geopolitical realities. 

The post-Locarno period witnessed France’s step-by-step retreat from 
the Versailles settlement — against its better judgment — under constant 
British (and American) pressures to go even further. After Locarno, capital 
— mostly American — poured into Germany, accelerating the moderniza- 
tion of its industry. The Inter-Allied Military Control Commission, which 
had been created to supervise German disarmament, was abolished in 
1927, and its functions were turned over to the League of Nations, which 
had no means of verifying compliance. 

Germany’s secret rearmament accelerated. As early as 1920, the then 
minister of industry, Walther Rathenau, had consoled the German military 
with the argument that the provisions of Versailles leading to the disman- 
tling of heavy German armaments would affect primarily weapons which 
would in any event soon become obsolete. And nothing, he argued, could 
prevent research on modern weapons or the creation of the industrial 
capacity to build them quickly. Attending army maneuvers in 1926, shortly 
after Locarno was ratified and at the moment that Briand and Stresemann 
were meeting at Thoiry, Field Marshal von Hindenburg, the Commander 
of the German army for the last three years of the war and the recently 
elected President of Germany, said: “I have seen today that the German 
army’s traditional standard of spirit and skill has been preserved.” 15 If 
that was so, France’s security would be in jeopardy as soon as the restric- 
tions on the size of the German army were lifted. 

As the disarmament issue moved to the forefront of international diplo- 
macy, this threat loomed ever closer. Demanding political equality, Ger- 
many was carefully creating the psychological framework for insisting on 
military parity later. France refused to disarm unless it obtained additional 
security guarantees; Great Britain, the only country in a position to extend 
them, refused to guarantee the Eastern settlement and would go no fur- 
ther than Locarno with respect to the Western settlement, thereby un- 
derlining the fact that Locarno was less of a commitment than an alliance. 

To avoid, or at least to delay, the day of formal German equality, France 
began to play the game of developing criteria for the reduction of arms 
as favored by League of Nations disarmament experts. It submitted an 
analytical paper to the League Preparatory Commission relating actual 


279 



Diplomacy 


power to potential power, trained reserves to demographic trends, and 
weapons-in-being to the rate of technological change. But none of the 
finely spun theories could get around the key issue, which was that, at 
equal levels of armaments, however low, French security was in jeopardy 
because of Germany’s superior mobilization potential. The more France 
seemed to accept the premises of the Preparatory Commission, the more 
pressure it generated against itself. In the end, all the various French 
maneuvers served primarily to magnify the Anglo-Saxons’ conviction that 
France was the real obstacle to disarmament and therefore to peace. 

The poignancy of the French dilemma was that, after Locarno, France 
was no longer in a position to pursue its convictions and had to settle for 
mitigating its fears. French policy grew increasingly reactive and defen- 
sive. Symbolic of this state of mind was that France began to construct the 
Maginot Line within two years of Locarno — at a time when Germany was 
still disarmed and the independence of the new states of Eastern Europe 
depended on France’s ability to come to their aid. In the event of German 
aggression, Eastern Europe could only be saved if France adopted an 
offensive strategy centered on its using the demilitarized Rhineland as a 
hostage. Yet the Maginot Line indicated that France intended to stay on 
the defensive inside its own borders, thereby liberating Germany to work 
its will in the East. French political and military strategies were no longer 
in step. 

Confused leaders have a tendency to substitute public relations maneu- 
vers for a sense of direction. Driven by the desire to be perceived as 
doing something, Briand used the occasion of the tenth anniversary of 
America’s entry into the war to submit in June 1927 a draft treaty to 
Washington according to which the two governments would renounce 
war in their relations with each other and agree to settle all their disputes 
by peaceful means. The American Secretary of State, Frank B. Kellogg, did 
not quite know how to respond to a document which renounced what 
no one feared and offered what everyone took for granted. The approach 
of the election year of 1928 helped to clear Kellogg’s mind; “peace” was 
popular, and Briand’s draft had the advantage of not involving any practi- 
cal consequence. 

In early 1928, Secretary Kellogg ended his silence and accepted the 
draft treaty. But he went Briand one better, proposing that the renuncia- 
tion of war include as many other nations as possible. The offer proved 
as irresistible as it was meaningless. On August 27, 1928, the Pact of Paris 
(popularly known as the Kellogg-Briand Pact), renouncing war as an 
instrument of national policy, was signed with great fanfare by -fifteen 
nations. It was quickly ratified by practically all the countries of the world, 


280 



Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 


including Germany Japan, and Italy, the nations whose aggressions would 
blight the next decade. 

No sooner was the Pact signed than second thoughts began to seize the 
world’s statesmen. France qualified its original proposal by inserting a 
clause legalizing wars of self-defense and wars to honor obligations aris- 
ing out of the League Covenant, the Locarno guarantees, and all of 
France’s alliances. This brought matters back to their starting point, for 
the exceptions encompassed every conceivable practical case. Next, Great 
Britain insisted on freedom of action in order to defend its empire. 
America’s reservations were the most sweeping of all; it invoked the 
Monroe Doctrine, the right of self-defense, and the stipulation that each 
nation be its own judge of the requirements of self-defense. Retaining 
every possible loophole, the United States rejected participation in any 
enforcement action as well. 

In testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee a few 
months later, Kellogg presented the extraordinary theory that the United 
States had no obligation under the Pact to help victims of aggression, 
since such aggression would already have proved that the Pact had been 
abrogated. “Supposing some other nation does break this treaty; why 
should we interest ourselves in it?” asked Senator Walsh from Montana. 
“There is not a bit of reason,” replied the Secretary of State. 16 

Kellogg had reduced the treaty to the tautology that the Pact of Paris 
would preserve the peace as long as the peace was being preserved. War 
was banned in all circumstances except those which were foreseeable. 
No wonder that D. W. Brogan had this to say about the Kellogg-Briand 
Pact: “The United States, which had abolished the evils of drink by the 
Eighteenth Amendment, invited the world to abolish war by taking the 
pledge. The world, not quite daring to believe or doubt, obeyed.” 17 

In the event, Briand’s original idea was transformed by his erstwhile 
allies into a new means of putting pressure on France. Henceforth it 
was widely argued that, with war outlawed, France had an obligation to 
accelerate its own disarmament. To symbolize the era of goodwill, the 
Allies ended the occupation of the Rhineland in 1928, five years ahead of 
schedule. 

Concurrently, Austen Chamberlain let it be known that, as far as Great 
Britain was concerned, the Polish border with Germany could, and in- 
deed should, be modified, if only the Germans were civilized about it: 

If she [Germany] comes into the League and plays her part there in a 

friendly and conciliatory spirit I myself believe that within a reasonable 

number of years she will find herself in a position where her economic 


281 



Diplomacy 


and commercial support is so necessary and her political friendship so 
desirable to Poland that, without having recourse to the League machin- 
ery, she will be able to make a friendly arrangement on her own 

account directly with the Poles If the German public and press 

could be restrained from talking so much about the eastern frontiers, 
they might get more quickly to a solution. 18 


Stresemann skillfully used Germany’s entry into the League both to in- 
crease his options toward the Soviet Union and to intensify German 
pressure on France for parity in armaments. For example, Stresemann 
asked for and was granted an exemption permitting German participation 
in the enforcement provisions of the League Charter (Article 16) on the 
ground that a disarmed Germany was in no position to face the risks of 
sanctions. Next, in Bismarckian fashion, Stresemann notified Moscow that 
his request for the exemption had been due to Germany’s reluctance to 
join any anti-Soviet coalition. 

Moscow took the hint. Within a year of Locarno, in April 1926, a treaty 
of neutrality between the Soviet Union and Germany was signed in Berlin. 
Each party agreed to remain neutral if the other was attacked; each agreed 
not to join any political combination or economic boycott aimed at the 
other — presumably regardless of the issue. In effect, this meant that the 
two countries excluded themselves from the application of collective 
security against each other. And Germany had already exempted itself 
from sanctions against anyone else. Berlin and Moscow were united in 
hostility to Poland, as German Chancellor Wirth told his Ambassador to 
Moscow, Ulrich von Brockdorff-Rantzau: “One thing I tell you frankly; 
Poland must be eliminated. ... I do not conclude any treaty which might 
strengthen Poland.” 19 

Nevertheless, French leaders, especially Briand, concluded that the ful- 
fillment policy remained Frances only realistic option. If France’s worst 
fears came to pass and Germany resumed a bellicose policy, the hope of 
eventually gaining British support and maintaining America’s goodwill 
would surely be jeopardized if France could be blamed for having 
wrecked conciliation. 

Gradually, Europe’s center of gravity shifted to Berlin. Amazingly, at 
least in retrospect, Stresemann’s domestic position was disintegrating all 
this time. The prevailing nationalist attitude could be seen in the reaction 
to the so-called Young Plan, which the Allies had proposed when the five- 
year term for the Dawes Plan ran out in 1929. The Young Plan reduced 
German reparations even further and established a terminal, albeit dis- 
tant, date for them. In 1924, the Dawes Plan had been adopted with the 


282 



Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 


support of German conservatives; in 1929, the Young Plan, which offered 
considerably better terms, came under violent attack from German con- 
servatives who were backed by the surging Nazi Party and by the commu- 
nists. It was finally approved in the Reichstag by just twenty votes. 

For a few years, the purported spirit of Locarno had signified the aspira- 
tion toward goodwill among the former adversaries of the First World 
War. But in German, the word “spirit” is also a synonym for “ghost,” and 
by the end of the decade it was becoming fashionable in nationalistic 
circles to joke about the “ghost” of Locarno. This cynical attitude toward 
the centerpiece of the Versailles international order existed even in the 
halcyon days of German economic recovery, before the Depression had 
radicalized German politics beyond repair. 

Stresemann died on October 3, 1929. He proved irreplaceable because 
Germany had no other leader of comparable talent or subtlety and, above 
all, because the rehabilitation of Germany and the pacification of Europe 
had in such large part been due to the confidence the Western powers 
had placed in his personality. For quite a long time, the prevailing view 
was that Stresemann had embodied all the qualities of the “good Euro- 
pean.” In this sense, he was treated as a precursor of the great Konrad 
Adenauer, who recognized that France and Germany in fact shared a 
common destiny across the gulf of their historic rivalries. 

Yet, when Stresemann ’s papers became available, they seemed to con- 
tradict the benign estimation of him. They revealed a calculating prac- 
titioner of Realpolitik who pursued the traditional German national 
interest with ruthless persistence. For Stresemann, these interests were 
straightforward: to restore Germany to its pre-1914 stature, to dispose of 
the financial burdens of reparations, to attain military parity with France 
and Great Britain, to revise Germany’s Eastern border, and to achieve 
the union ( Anschluss ) of Austria and Germany. Edgar Stern-Rubarth, a 
Stresemann aide, described his chief s objectives as follows: 

Stresemann’s ultimate hope, as he once confessed to me, was: To free 
the Rhineland, to recover Eupen-Malmedy, and the Saar, to perfect 
Austria’s Anschluss, and to have, under mandate or otherwise an African 
colony where essential tropical raw materials could be secured and an 
outlet created for the surplus energy of the younger generation. 20 

Stresemann was therefore clearly not a “good European” in the post- 
World War II sense of the phrase, a criterion which did not yet exist, 
however. Most Western statesmen shared Stresemann’s view that Ver- 
sailles required revision, especially in the East, and that Locarno was but 


283 



Diplomacy 


a stage in this process. For France, of course, it was unbearably painful to 
have to deal with a resurgent Germany after a war in which it had ex- 
pended its very substance. Yet this was also an accurate reflection of the 
new distribution of power. Stresemann understood that, even within the 
limits of Versailles, Germany was potentially the strongest nation in Eu- 
rope. He drew from this assessment the Realpolitik conclusion that he 
had before him an opportunity to rebuild Germany to at least its pre- 
1914 level and probably beyond. 

Unlike his nationalist critics, however — and quite contrary to the Nazis 
— Stresemann relied on patience, compromise, and the blessing of Euro- 
pean consensus to achieve his goals. Mental agility allowed him to trade 
paper concessions — especially on the sensitive and symbolic issue of 
reparations — for an end to the military occupation of Germany and for 
the prospect of long-term changes which could not fail to place his coun- 
try in an increasingly pivotal position. Unlike the German nationalists, 
however, he saw no need for a violent revision of Versailles. 

Stresemann’s opportunity to pursue his policy was inherent in Ger- 
many’s resources and potential. The war had not crippled Germany’s 
power, and Versailles had enhanced its geopolitical position. Not even a 
vastly more catastrophic defeat in World War II would succeed in elimi- 
nating Germany’s influence in Europe. Rather than seeing Stresemann as 
a precursor of the Nazi assault on Western values, it would be more 
accurate to view Nazi excesses as an interruption of Stresemann’s gradual 
and almost certainly peaceful progression to achieving a decisive role for 
his country in Europe. 

Over time, tactic for Stresemann might well have turned into strategy, 
and expedient into conviction. In our own period, the original motive 
for President Sadat’s rapprochement with Israel was almost certainly to 
undermine the West’s image of Arab bellicosity and to place Israel on the 
psychological defensive. Like Stresemann, Sadat tried to drive a wedge 
between his adversary and its friends. By fulfilling reasonable Israeli de- 
mands, he hoped to weaken its ultimate refusal to return Arab, and espe- 
cially Egyptian, land. But as time went on, Sadat actually turned into the 
apostle of peace and the healer of international rifts, which at first may 
well have been a pose. In time, the pursuit of peace and conciliation 
ceased to be for Sadat tools of the national interest and turned into values 
in and of themselves. Was Stresemann heading along a similar path? His 
premature death has left us with that possibility as one of history’s un- 
solved riddles. 

At the time of Stresemann’s death, the reparations issue was on the 
way to being resolved, and Germany’s western border had been settled. 


284 



Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 

Germany remained revisionist with respect to its eastern borders and to 
the disarmament provisions of the Versailles Treaty. The attempt to pres- 
sure Germany by occupying its territory had failed, and the modified 
collective security approach of Locarno had not stilled German claims for 
parity. The statesmen of Europe now took refuge in an all-out commit- 
ment to disarmament as their best hope for peace. 

The notion that Germany was entitled to parity had by now become 
fixed in the British mind. As early as in his first term in office, in 1924, 
Labour Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald had proclaimed disarmament 
as his top priority. In his second term, starting in 1929, he stopped con- 
struction of a naval base in Singapore and the building of new cruisers 
and submarines. In 1932, his government announced a moratorium on 
airplane construction. MacDonald’s principal adviser on the subject, 
Philip Noel-Baker, declared that only disarmament could prevent another 
war. 

The basic inconsistency between parity for Germany and security for 
France remained unresolved, however, perhaps because it was irresolu- 
ble. In 1932, a year before Hitler came to power, French Prime Minister 
Edouard Herriot predicted: “I have no illusions. I am convinced that 
Germany wishes to rearm — We are at a turning point in history. Until 
now Germany has practised a policy of submission. . . . [N]ow she is begin- 
ning a positive policy. Tomorrow it will be a policy of territorial de- 
mands.” 21 The most remarkable aspect of this statement was its passive, 
resigned tone. Herriot said nothing about the French army, which was 
still the largest in Europe; about the Rhineland, demilitarized under Lo- 
carno; about a still-disarmed Germany; or about French responsibility for 
the security of Eastern Europe. Unwilling to fight for its convictions, 
France now simply awaited its fate. 

Great Britain saw matters on the Continent from a quite different per- 
spective. Wanting to conciliate Germany, it relentlessly pressed France to 
accede to German parity in armaments. Disarmament experts are notori- 
ously ingenious in coming up with schemes which meet the formal aspect 
of security issues without addressing the substance. Thus, the British 
experts devised a proposal granting Germany parity but without allowing 
conscription, thereby theoretically putting a premium on France’s larger 
pool of trained reserves (as if Germany, having come this far, could not 
find a means to evade this last, relatively minor, restriction). 

In that same fateful year before Hitler’s rise to power, the democratic 
German government felt confident enough to walk out of the Disarma- 
ment Conference in protest against what it called French discrimination. 
It was wooed back with the promise of “[ejquality of rights in a system 


285 



Diplomacy 


which would provide security for all nations,” 22 a weaseling phrase im- 
plying the theoretical right to parity with “security” provisions which 
made it too difficult to achieve. The public mood had gone beyond such 
subtleties. The New Statesman, an organ of the British Labour Party, 
greeted the formula as “the unqualified recognition of the principle of 
the equality of states.” At the other end of the British political spectrum, 
the Times spoke approvingly of “the timely redress of inequality.” 23 

The formula of “equality [within] a system [of] security” was, however, 
a contradiction in terms. France was no longer strong enough to defend 
itself against Germany, and Great Britain continued to refuse the military 
alliance with France that could have established a crude approximation 
of geopolitical equality (though, based on the experience of the war, even 
that was questionable). While insisting on defining equality in the purely 
formalistic terms of ending the discriminatory treatment of Germany, 
England remained silent about the impact of such equality on the Euro- 
pean equilibrium. In 1932, an exasperated Prime Minister MacDonald 
told French Foreign Minister Paul-Boncour: “French demands always cre- 
ated the difficulty that they required of Great Britain that she should 
assume further obligations, and this at the moment could not be contem- 
plated.” 24 This demoralizing impasse continued until Hitler walked out 
of disarmament negotiations in October 1933. 

After a decade in which diplomacy had focused on Europe, it was — 
unexpectedly — Japan which demonstrated the hollowness of collective 
security and of the League itself, ushering in a decade of mounting vio- 
lence in the 1930s. 

In 1931, Japanese forces occupied Manchuria, which legally was a part 
of China, although the authority of the Chinese central government had 
not operated there for many years. Intervention on such a scale had not 
been attempted since the founding of the League. But the League had no 
enforcement machinery for even the economic sanctions contemplated 
in its article 16. In its hesitations, the League exemplified the basic di- 
lemma of collective security: no country was prepared to fight a war 
against Japan (or was in a position to do so without American participa- 
tion, since the Japanese navy dominated Asian waters). Even if the machin- 
ery for economic sanctions had existed, no country was willing to curtail 
trade with Japan in the midst of the Depression; on the other hand, no 
country was willing to accept the occupation of Manchuria. None of the 
League members knew how to overcome these self-inflicted contradic- 
tions. 

Finally, a mechanism was devised for doing nothing at all. It .took the 
form of a fact-finding mission — the standard device for diplomats signal- 


286 



Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 


ing that inaction is the desired outcome. Such commissions take time to 
assemble, to undertake studies, and to reach a consensus — by which 
point, with luck, the problem might even have gone away. Japan felt so 
confident of this pattern that it took the lead in recommending such a 
study. What came to be known as the Lytton Commission reported that 
Japan had justified grievances but had erred by not first exhausting all 
peaceful means of redress. This mildest of rebukes for occupying a terri- 
tory larger than itself proved too much for Japan, which responded by 
withdrawing from the League of Nations. It was the first step toward the 
unraveling of the entire institution. 

In Europe, the whole incident was treated as a kind of aberration 
peculiar to distant continents. Disarmament talks continued as if there 
were no Manchurian crisis, turning the debate over security versus parity 
into a largely ceremonial act. Then, on January 30, 1933, Hitler came to 
power in Germany and demonstrated that the Versailles system had in- 
deed been a house of cards. 


287 




CHAPTER TWELVE 

The End of Illusion: 
Hider and the 
Destruction of Versailles 


Hitler 's advent to power marked one of the greatest calamities in the 
history of the world. But for him, the collapse of the house of cards which 
represented the Versailles international order might have proceeded in a 
peaceful, or at least noncatastrophic, fashion. That Germany would 
emerge from that process as the strongest nation on the Continent was 
inevitable; the orgy of killing and devastation that it unleashed was the 
work of one demonic personality. 

Hitler attained eminence through his oratory. Unlike other revolution- 


288 



The End of Illusion 


ary leaders, he was a solitary political adventurer representing no major 
school of political thought. His philosophy, as expressed in Mein Kampf, 
ranged from the banal to the fantastic and consisted of a popularized 
repackaging of right-wing, radical, conventional wisdom. Standing alone, 
it could never have launched an intellectual current that culminated in 
revolution, as had Marx’s Das Kapital or the works of the philosophers of 
the eighteenth century. 

Demagogic skill catapulted Hitler to the leadership of Germany and 
remained his stock in trade throughout his career. With the instincts of 
an outcast and an unerring eye for psychological weaknesses, he shunted 
his adversaries from disadvantage to disadvantage, until they were thor- 
oughly demoralized and ready to acquiesce to his domination. Interna- 
tionally, he ruthlessly exploited the democracies’ guilty conscience about 
the Treaty of Versailles. 

As the head of government, Hitler operated by instinct rather than 
analysis. Fancying himself an artist, he resisted sedentary habits and was 
constantly and restlessly on the move. He disliked Berlin and found so- 
lace in his Bavarian retreat, to which he would repair for months at a 
time, though he quickly grew bored even there. Since he disdained or- 
derly work procedures and his ministers found it difficult to gain access 
to him, policymaking occurred in fits and starts. Anything consistent with 
his flashes of frenetic activity thrived; anything requiring sustained effort 
tended to languish. 

The essence of demagoguery resides in the ability to distill emotion 
and frustration into a single moment. Gratifying that moment and achiev- 
ing a mesmeric, nearly sensual relationship with his entourage and the 
public at large became Hitler’s specialties. Abroad, Hitler was most suc- 
cessful when the world perceived him as pursuing normal, limited objec- 
tives. All his great foreign policy triumphs occurred in the first five years 
of his rule, 1933-38, and were based on his victims’ assumption that 
his aim was to reconcile the Versailles system with its purported prin- 
ciples. 

Once Hitler abandoned the pretense of rectifying injustice, his credibil- 
ity vanished. Embarking on naked conquest for its own sake made him 
lose his touch. There were still occasional flashes of intuition, as in his 
design of the campaign against France in 1940 and in his refusal to permit 
a retreat in front of Moscow in 1941, which would almost certainly have 
caused a collapse of the German army. However, Hitler’s seminal experi- 
ence seems to have been Germany’s defeat in World War I. He never 
ceased to recount how he first learned of it while bedridden in a military 
hospital, partially blinded by mustard gas. Ascribing Germany’s collapse 


289 



Diplomacy 


to treachery, a Jewish conspiracy, and lack of will, he would for the rest 
of his life insist that Germany could be defeated only by itself, not by 
foreigners. This line of thinking transmuted the defeat of 1918 into trea- . 
son, while the failure on the part of Germany’s leaders to fight to the 
end became a staple of Hitler’s obsessive rhetoric and mind-numbing 
monologues. 

Hitler always seemed strangely unfulfilled by his victories; in the end, 
he only seemed able to realize his image of himself by overcoming 
imminent collapse through sheer willpower. Psychologists may find 
therein one explanation for his conducting the war in a manner that 
seemed to lack a strategic or political rationale until Germany’s resources 
had been squandered and Hitler could finally, and still unyieldingly, fulfill 
himself by defying the world in a bomb shelter in the encircled capital of 
his almost completely occupied country. 

Demagogic skill and egomania were two sides of the same coin. 
Hitler was incapable of normal conversation, and either engaged in long 
monologues or lapsed into bored silences when some interlocutor 
managed to seize the floor — and at times even dozed off. 1 Hitler was 
wont to ascribe his, in truth, nearly miraculous rise from Vienna’s 
netherworld to unchallenged rule over Germany to personal qualities 
unrivaled by any contemporary. Thus, a recital of his rise to power 
entered the deadening liturgy of Hitler’s “table talks” as transcribed by 
his disciples. 2 

Hitler’s egomania had deadlier consequences as well; he had con- 
vinced himself — and, what is more significant, his entourage — that, be- 
cause his faculties were so unique, all his goals had to be accomplished 
in his own lifetime. Since, on the basis of his family history, he had 
estimated that his life would be relatively short, he was never able to 
permit any of his successes to mature, and pushed forward according to 
a timetable established by his assessment of his physical powers. History 
offers no other example of a major war being started on the basis of 
medical conjecture. 

When all was said and done, Hitler’s startling early successes amounted 
to an accelerated harvesting of opportunities which had been created by 
the policies of the predecessors he despised, especially Stresemann. Like 
the Peace of Westphalia, the Treaty of Versailles left a powerful country 
confronting a group of much smaller and unprotected states on its eastern 
border. The difference, however, was that while this had been intentional 
at Westphalia, quite the opposite was true of Versailles. Versailles and 
Locarno had smoothed Germany’s road into Eastern Europe, where a 
patient German leadership would in time have achieved a preponderant 


290 



The End of Illusion 

position by peaceful means, or perhaps even have had it handed to it by 
the West. But Hitler’s reckless megalomania turned what could have been 
a peaceful evolution into a world war. 

At first, Hitler’s true nature was obscured by his seeming ordinariness. 
Neither the German nor the Western European establishment believed 
that he really meant to overturn the existing order, even though he an- 
nounced his intentions to that effect often enough. Tired of harassment by 
the ever-growing Nazi Party, demoralized by the Depression and political 
chaos, a conservative German leadership appointed Hitler as Chancellor, 
and tried to reassure itself by surrounding him with respectable conserva- 
tives (there were only three Nazi Party members in Hitler’s first Cabinet 
of January 30, 1933). Hitler, however, had not come all that long way to 
be contained by parliamentary maneuvers. With a few brusque strokes 
(and on June 30, 1934, a purge assassinating a number of rivals and 
opponents), he made himself dictator of Germany within eighteen 
months of taking office. 

The Western democracies’ initial reaction to Hitler’s ascendancy was to 
accelerate their commitment to disarmament. Germany’s government 
was now headed by a chancellor who had proclaimed his intention to 
overthrow the Versailles settlement, to rearm, and then to engage in a 
policy of expansion. Even so, the democracies saw no need for taking 
special precautions. If anything, Hitler’s accession to power strengthened 
Great Britain’s determination to pursue disarmament. Some British diplo- 
mats even thought that Hitler represented a better hope for peace than 
the less stable governments which had preceded him. “[Hitler’s] signature 
would bind all Germany like no other German’s in all her past,” 3 British 
Ambassador Phipps wrote exuberantly to the Foreign Office. A British 
guarantee for France was unnecessary, according to Ramsay MacDonald, 
because, if Germany broke a disarmament agreement, “the strength of 
world opposition to her cannot be exaggerated.” 4 

France, of course, was not reassured by such soothing pronounce- 
ments. Its chief problem still remained how to find security if Germany 
rearmed and Great Britain refused a guarantee. If world public opinion 
were really all that decisive in dealing with violators, why should Great 
Britain be so reluctant to give a guarantee? Because “public opinion in 
England would not support it,” replied Sir John Simon, the Foreign Secre- 
tary, thus making explicit France’s nightmare that Great Britain could not 
be relied on to defend what it would not guarantee. 5 But why would the 
British public not support a guarantee? Because it did not consider such 
an attack likely, replied Stanley Baldwin, head of the Conservative Party 
and in all but name leader of the British government: 

291 



Diplomacy 


If it could be proved that Germany was rearming, then a new situation 
would immediately arise, which Europe would have to face — If that 
situation arose, His Majesty’s Government would have to consider it 
very seriously, but that situation had not yet arisen. 6 

The argument was endlessly circular and endlessly contradictory: a guar- 
antee was both too risky and unnecessary; after achieving parity, Germany 
would be satisfied. Yet a guarantee of what Germany presumably was not 
challenging would be too dangerous even though the condemnation of 
world opinion would stop a violator in its tracks. Finally, Hitler himself 
put an end to the evasions and the hypocrisy. On October 14, 1933, 
Germany left the Disarmament Conference forever — not because Hitler 
had been rebuffed but because he was afraid that German demands 
for parity might be met, thereby thwarting his desires for unrestricted 
rearmament. A week later, Hitler withdrew from the League of Nations. 
In early 1934, he announced German rearmament. In separating itself 
from the world community in this way, Germany did not suffer any visible 
damage. 

Hitler had clearly laid down a challenge, yet the democracies were 
uncertain as to what it really meant. By rearming, was Hitler not in fact 
implementing what most members of the League had already conceded 
in principle? Why react before Hitler had in fact committed some defin- 
able act of aggression? After all, was that not what collective security was 
all about? In this manner, the leaders of the Western democracies avoided 
the pain of being obliged to make ambiguous choices. It was much easier 
to wait for some clear demonstration of Hitler s bad faith because, in its 
absence, public backing for strong measures could not be relied on — or 
so the leaders of the democracies thought. Hitler, of course, had every 
incentive to obscure his true intentions until it was too late for the West- 
ern democracies to mount effective resistance. In any event, the demo- 
cratic statesmen of the interwar period feared war more than they feared 
a weakening of the balance of power. Security, argued Ramsay MacDon- 
ald, must be sought “not by military but by moral means.” 

Hitler skillfully exploited such attitudes by periodically launching 
peace offensives that were deftly geared to the illusions of his potential 
victims. When he withdrew from the disarmament talks, he offered to 
limit the German army to 300,000 men and the German air force to half 
the size of that of France. The offer diverted attention from the fact that 
Germany had scrapped the limit of 100,000 established at Versailles while 
seemingly agreeing to new ceilings that could not be reached for several 
years — at which point those limits, too, would no doubt be jettisoned. 


292 



The End of Illusion 


France refused the offer, declaring it would look after its own security. 
The haughtiness of the French reply could not obscure the reality that 
France’s nightmare — military parity with Germany (or worse) — was now 
upon it. Great Britain drew the conclusion that disarmament had become 
more important than ever. The Cabinet announced: “Our policy is still to 
seek by international cooperation the limitation and reduction of world 
armaments, as our obligations under the Covenant and as the only means 
to prevent a race in armaments.” 7 Indeed, the Cabinet reached the ex- 
traordinary decision that the best option was to bargain from what, by its 
own estimate, was turning into a position of weakness. On November 29, 
1933 — six weeks after Hitler had ordered the German delegation to leave 
the Disarmament Conference — Baldwin told the Cabinet: 

If we had no hope of achieving any limitation of armaments we should 
have every right to feel disquietude as to the situation not only so far as 
concerns the Air Force, but also the Army and Navy. [Britain was] using 
every possible effort to bring about a scheme of disarmament which 
would include Germany . 8 

Since Germany was rearming and the state of British defenses was, in 
Baldwin’s own words, disquieting, a greater British defense effort might 
indeed have seemed to be in order. Yet Baldwin took exactly the opposite 
approach. He continued a freeze in the production of military aircraft, 
which had been instituted in 1932. The gesture was intended “as a further 
earnest of His Majesty’s Government’s desire to promote the work of 
the Disarmament Conference.” 9 Baldwin failed to explain what incentive 
Hitler would have to negotiate disarmament as long as Great Britain was 
engaging in unilateral disarmament. (A more charitable explanation for 
Baldwin’s actions is that Great Britain was developing new models of 
aircraft; having nothing to produce until these were ready, Baldwin was 
making a virtue out of a necessity.) 

As for France, it took refuge in wishful thinking. The British Ambassa- 
dor to Paris reported: “France has, in fact, fallen back on a policy of 
extreme caution, she is opposed to any forceful measures which would 
savour of military adventure.” 10 A report to Edouard Daladier, then Minis- 
ter of War, shows that even France had begun to lean toward League 
orthodoxy. The French military attache in Berlin proclaimed disarma- 
ment as the most effective way of containing Hitler, having convinced 
himself that more dangerous fanatics than Hitler were lurking in the 
wings: 

It seems that there is no other way for us than to reach an understand- 
ing which will contain ... at least for a while, Germany’s military devel- 

{ % 


293 



Diplomacy 


opment If Hitler is sincere in proclaiming his desire for peace, we 

will be able to congratulate ourselves on having reached agreement; if 
he has other designs or if he has to give way one day to some fanatic 
we will at least have postponed the outbreak of a war and that is indeed 
a gain. 11 


Great Britain and France opted to let German rearmament unfold be- 
cause, quite literally, they did not know what else to do. Great Britain was 
not yet prepared to give up on collective security and the League, and 
France had become so dispirited that it could not bring itself to act on its 
premonitions: France dared not act alone, and Great Britain refused to 
act in concert. 

In retrospect, it is easy to ridicule the fatuousness of the assessment of 
Hitlers motives by his contemporaries. But his ambitions, not to mention 
his criminality, were not all that apparent at the outset. In his first two 
years in office, Hitler was primarily concerned with solidifying his rule. 
But in the eyes of many British and French leaders, Hitlers truculent 
foreign policy style was more than counterbalanced by his staunch anti- 
communism, and by his restoration of the German economy. 

Statesmen always face the dilemma that, when their scope for action is 
greatest, they have a minimum of knowledge. By the time they have 
garnered sufficient knowledge, the scope for decisive action is likely to 
have vanished. In the 1930s, British leaders were too unsure about Hit- 
ler’s objectives and French leaders too unsure about themselves to act on 
the basis of assessments which they could not prove. The tuition fee for 
learning about Hitler’s true nature was tens of millions of graves stretch- 
ing from one end of Europe to the other. On the other hand, had the 
democracies forced a showdown with Hitler early in his rule, historians 
would still be arguing about whether Hitler had been a misunderstood 
nationalist or a maniac bent on world domination. 

The West’s obsession with Hitler’s motives was, of course, misguided 
in the first place. The tenets of the balance of power should have made it 
clear that a large and strong Germany bordered on the east by small and 
weak states was a dangerous threat. Realpolitik teaches that, regardless of 
Hitler’s motives, Germany’s relations with its neighbors would be deter- 
mined by their relative power. The West should have spent less time 
assessing Hitler’s motives and more time counterbalancing Germany’s 
growing strength. 

No one has stated the result of the Western Allies’ hesitancy to confront 
Hitler better than Joseph Goebbels, Hitler’s diabolical propaganda chief. 
In April 1940, on the eve of the Nazi invasion of Norway, he told a secret 
briefing: 


294 



The End of Illusion 


Up to now we have succeeded in leaving the enemy in the dark con- 
cerning Germany’s real goals, just as before 1932 our domestic foes 
never saw where we were going or that our oath of legality was just a 

trick They could have suppressed us. They could have arrested a 

couple of us in 1925 and that would have been that, the end. No, they 
let us through the danger zone. That’s exactly how it was in foreign 

policy too In 1933 a French premier ought to have said (and if I had 

been the French premier I would have said it): “The new Reich Chan- 
cellor is the man who wrote Mein Kampf, which says this and that. This 
man cannot be tolerated in our vicinity. Either he disappears or we 
march!” But they didn’t do it. They left us alone and let us slip through 
the risky zone, and we were able to sail around all dangerous reefs. 
And when we were done, and well armed ' better than they, then they 
started the war! [Italics in original.] 12 

The leaders of the democracies refused to face the fact that, once Ger- 
many attained a given level of armaments, Hitler’s real intentions would 
become irrelevant. The rapid growth of German military strength was 
bound to overturn the equilibrium unless it was either stopped or bal- 
anced. 

This in fact was Churchill’s lonely message. But in the 1930s, the lead 
time for recognizing prophets was still quite long. So the British leaders, 
in a rare show of unanimity extending across the entire political spec- 
trum, rejected Churchill’s warnings. Starting from the premise that disar- 
mament, not preparedness, was the key to peace, they treated Hitler as a 
psychological problem, not a strategic danger. 

When, in 1934, Churchill urged that Great Britain respond to German 
rearmament by a buildup in the Royal Air Force, government and opposi- 
tion leaders united in scorn. Herbert Samuel spoke on behalf of the 
Liberal Party: “It would seem as if he were engaged not in giving sound, 
sane advice . . . but ... in a reckless game of bridge. ... All these formulas 
are dangerous.” 13 Sir Stafford Cripps put forward the Labour Party’s case 
with supercilious sarcasm: 

One could picture him as some old baron in the Middle Ages who is 
laughing at the idea of the possibility of disarmament in the baronies 
of this country and pointing out that the only way in which he and his 
feudal followers could maintain their safety and their cows was by 
having as strong an armament as possible. 14 

Conservative Prime Minister Baldwin made the rejection of Churchill 
unanimous when he informed the House of Commons that he had not 
“given up hope either for the limitation or for the restriction of some 


295 



Diplomacy 


kind of arms.” According to Baldwin, accurate information about German 
air strength was “extraordinarily difficult” to obtain — though he did not 
reveal why this should be so. 15 Nevertheless, he was confident that “[i]t is 
not the case that Germany is rapidly approaching equality with us.” 16 
Baldwin felt “no ground at this moment for undue alarm and still less for 
panic.” Chiding Churchill’s figures as “exaggerated,” he stressed that 
“there is no immediate menace confronting us or anyone in Europe at 
this moment — no actual emergency.” 17 

France sought shelter behind an accumulation of halfhearted alliances 
by transforming the unilateral guarantees of Czechoslovakia, Poland, and 
Romania of the 1920s into mutual defense treaties. It meant that those 
countries would now be obliged to come to France’s assistance even if 
Germany chose to settle scores with France before turning east. 

It was an empty, indeed a pathetic, gesture. The alliances were logical 
enough as French guarantees for the weak new states of Eastern Europe. 
But they were not suited for serving as the sort of mutual assistance 
treaties which would confront Germany with the risk of a two-front war. 
They were too weak to rein in Germany in the East; offensive operations 
against Germany to relieve France were out of the question. Underscor- 
ing the irrelevance of these pacts, Poland balanced its commitments to 
France with a nonaggression treaty with Germany so that, in case of an 
attack on France, Poland’s formal obligations would cancel each other out 
— or, more precisely, they would leave Poland free to choose that align- 
ment which promised it the greatest benefit at the moment of crisis. 

A new Franco-Soviet agreement signed in 1935 demonstrated the mag- 
nitude of France’s psychological and political demoralization. Before 
World War I, France had eagerly sought a political alliance with Russia 
and did not rest until that political understanding had been turned into a 
military pact. In 1935, France’s position was strategically far weaker and 
its need for Soviet military support nearly desperate. Nevertheless, France 
grudgingly concluded a political alliance with the Soviet Union while 
adamantly rejecting military staff talks. As late as 1937, France would not 
permit Soviet observers to attend its annual maneuvers. 

There were three reasons for the aloof behavior of French leaders, 
all of which surely magnified Stalin’s congenital distrust of the Western 
democracies. The first was their fear that too close an association with the 
Soviet Union would weaken France’s indispensable ties to Great Britain. 
Second, France’s Eastern European allies, situated between the Soviet 
Union and Germany, were not prepared to permit Soviet troops to enter 
their territory, rendering it difficult to find a subject for meaningful Fran- 
co-Soviet staff talks. Finally, as early as 1938, French leaders felt so intimi- 


296 



The End of Illusion 


dated by Germany that they feared staff talks with the Soviet Union might, 
in the words of then Prime Minister Chautemps, “produce a declaration 
of war by Germany.” 18 

France thus ended up in a military alliance with countries too weak to 
help it, a political alliance with the Soviet Union with which it dared not 
cooperate militarily, and strategic dependence on Great Britain, which 
flatly refused to consider any military commitment. This arrangement 
was a prescription for a nervous breakdown, not a grand strategy. 

The only serious moves France made in response to growing German 
strength were in the direction of Italy. Mussolini was not exactly a devotee 
of collective security but he had a clear sense of Italy’s limitations, espe- 
cially where Germany was concerned. He feared that German annexation 
of Austria would lead to a demand for the return of the South Tirol, which 
was ethnically German. In January 1935, then Foreign Minister Pierre 
Laval concluded what came close to being a military alliance. Agreeing to 
consult each other in the event of any threat to the independence of 
Austria, Italy and France initiated military-staff talks in which they went so 
far as to discuss stationing Italian troops along the Rhine and French 
troops along the Austrian frontier. 

Three months later, after Hitler had reintroduced conscription, an ap- 
proximation of an alliance among Great Britain, France, and Italy seemed 
to be developing. Their heads of government met in the Italian resort of 
Stresa, where they agreed to resist any German attempt to change the 
Versailles Treaty by force. It was a minor historical irony that Mussolini 
should have hosted a conference to defend the Versailles settlement since 
he had long been a critic of Versailles, arguing that the treaty had short- 
changed Italy. 

Stresa was to be the last time that the victors of the First World War 
considered joint action. Two months after the conference, Great Britain 
signed a naval accord with Germany, which showed that, where its 
own security was concerned, Great Britain preferred to rely on bilateral 
deals with the adversary rather than on its Stresa partners. Germany 
agreed to limit its fleet to thirty-five percent of Great Britain’s for the next 
ten years, though it was granted the right to an equal number of sub- 
marines. 

The terms of the Naval Treaty were less significant than what they 
revealed about the state of mind of the democracies. The British Cabinet 
surely realized that the naval agreement in effect acquiesced to the Ger- 
man abrogation of the naval provisions of the Versailles Treaty and 
thereby, at a minimum, went against the spirit of the Stresa front. Its 
practical effect was to establish new ceilings on a bilateral basis — ceilings, 


297 



Diplomacy 


moreover, at the outer limit of Germany’s capacity to build — a method 
of arms control that was to become increasingly popular during the Cold 
War. The naval agreement also signified that Great Britain preferred to 
conciliate the adversary rather than rely on its partners in the Stresa front 
— the psychological framework for what later came to be known as the 
policy of appeasement. 

Soon thereafter, the Stresa front collapsed altogether. An adherent of 
Realpolitik, Mussolini took it for granted that he had a free hand for the 
kind of colonial expansion that had been routine prior to World War I. 
Consequently, he set about carving out an African empire in 1935 by 
conquering Abyssinia, Africa’s last independent nation, and, in the pro- 
cess, avenging an Italian humiliation by Abyssinian forces dating back to 
the turn of the century. 

But, whereas Mussolini’s aggression would have been accepted prior 
to World War I, it was now being initiated in a world that was in thrall to 
collective security and the League of Nations. Public opinion, especially 
in Great Britain, had already castigated the League for “failing” to prevent 
Japan’s conquest of Manchuria; in the interim, a mechanism for economic 
sanctions had been put in place. By the time Italy invaded Abyssinia in 
1935, the League had an official remedy for such aggression. Abyssinia 
was, moreover, a member of the League of Nations, though only as the 
result of a rather curious reversal of circumstances. In 1925, Italy had 
sponsored Abyssinia’s admission to the League in order to check pre- 
sumed British designs. Great Britain had acquiesced reluctantly, after 
arguing that Abyssinia was too barbaric for full-fledged membership in 
the international community. 

Now both countries were hoist by their own petard: Italy, by engaging 
in what had, by any standard, been unprovoked aggression against a 
member of the League; Great Britain, because it faced a challenge to 
collective security and not just another African colonial problem. To com- 
plicate matters, Great Britain and France had already conceded at Stresa 
that Abyssinia lay within Italy’s sphere of interest. Laval was to say later 
that he had had in mind a role for Italy similar to that of France in 
Morocco — that is, one of indirect control. But Mussolini could not be 
expected to understand that France and Great Britain, having conceded 
this much, would sacrifice a near-alliance against Germany over the dis- 
tinction between annexation and indirect control over Abyssinia. 

France and Great Britain never came to grips with the reality that they 
faced two mutually exclusive options. If they concluded that Italy was 
essential, to protecting Austria and, indirectly, perhaps even to helping 
maintain the demilitarized Rhineland it had guaranteed at Locarno, they 
would have needed to come up with some compromise to save Italy’s 


298 



The End of Illusion 


face in Africa and to keep the Stresa front intact. Alternatively, if the 
League was indeed the best instrument for both containing Germany and 
for rallying the Western public against aggression, it was necessary to 
pursue sanctions until it had been demonstrated that aggression did not 
pay. There was no middle ground. 

Yet the middle ground was exactly what the democracies, no longer 
having the self-confidence to define their choices, sought. Under British 
leadership, the League machinery of economic sanctions was activated. At 
the same time, Laval privately assured Mussolini that Italy’s access to oil 
would not be disrupted. Great Britain pursued essentially the same 
course by politely inquiring in Rome whether oil sanctions would lead to 
war. When Mussolini — both predictably and untruthfully — answered in 
the affirmative, the British Cabinet had the alibi it needed to combine its 
support for the League with an appeal to the widespread dread of war. 
This policy came to be expressed in the slogan “all sanctions short of 
war.” 

Later, Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin was to say somewhat wistfully 
that any sanctions that were likely to have worked would also have been 
likely to lead to war. So much, at any rate, for the notion that economic 
sanctions provide an alternative to force in resisting aggression — an argu- 
ment that would be repeated some fifty years later in the United States 
over the issue of how to deal with Iraq’s annexation of Kuwait, albeit with 
a happier outcome. 

Foreign Secretary Samuel Hoare understood that Great Britain had 
derailed its own strategy. To resist the impending German threat, Great 
Britain’s leaders should have confronted Hitler and conciliated Mussolini. 
They did just the opposite: they appeased Germany and confronted Italy. 
Grasping the absurdity of this state of affairs, Hoare and Laval devised a 
compromise in December 1935: Italy would receive Abyssinia’s fertile 
plains; Haile Selassie would continue to rule in the mountain fastness 
which was the historical site of his kingdom; Great Britain would contrib- 
ute to these compromises by giving landlocked Abyssinia access to the 
sea via British Somalia. Mussolini was fully expected to accept the plan, 
and Hoare was to present it for League approval. 

The Hoare-Laval plan came to naught because it was leaked to the press 
before it could be placed before the League of Nations — an extraordi- 
narily rare event in those days. The resulting cry of outrage forced Hoare 
to resign — the victim of seeking a practical compromise in the face of an 
aroused public opinion. Anthony Eden, his successor, speedily returned 
to the cocoon of collective security and economic sanctions — without, 
however, being willing to resort to force. 

In a pattern that would be repeated in successive crises, the democra- 


299 



Diplomacy 


cies justified their aversion to using force by vastly overestimating the 
military prowess of the adversary. London convinced itself that it could 
not handle the Italian fleet without French assistance. France went along 
halfheartedly and moved its fleet to the Mediterranean, further jeopardiz- 
ing its relationship with Italy as a Locarno guarantor and a Stresa partner. 
Even with this overwhelming accumulation of force, oil sanctions were 
never invoked. And ordinary sanctions did not work rapidly enough to 
prevent Abyssinia’s defeat — if indeed they could have worked at all. 

Italy’s conquest of Abyssinia was completed by May 1936, when Musso- 
lini proclaimed the king of Italy, Victor Emmanuel, as emperor of the 
newly named Ethiopia. Less than two months later, on June 30, the Coun- 
cil of the League of Nations met to consider the fait accompli. Haile 
Selassie sounded the death knell of collective security in a forlorn per- 
sonal appeal: 

It is not merely a question of a settlement in the matter of Italian 
aggression. It is a question of collective security; of the very existence 
of the League; of the trust placed by States in international treaties; of 
the value of promises made to small states that their integrity and their 
independence shall be respected and assured. It is a choice between 
the principle of equality of States and the imposition upon small Powers 
of the bonds of vassalage. 19 

On July 15, the League lifted all sanctions against Italy. Two years later, in 
the wake of Munich, Great Britain and France subordinated their moral 
objections to their fear of Germany by recognizing the Abyssinian con- 
quest. Collective security had condemned Haile Selassie to losing all of 
his country rather than the half he would have lost under the Realpolitik 
of the Hoare-Laval plan. 

In terms of military power, Italy was not remotely comparable to Great 
Britain, France, or Germany. But the void created by the aloofness of 
the Soviet Union turned Italy into a useful auxiliary in maintaining the 
independence of Austria and, to a limited extent, of the demilitarized 
Rhineland. As long as Great Britain and France had appeared to be the 
strongest nations in Europe, Mussolini had supported the Versailles settle- 
ment, especially since he profoundly distrusted Germany and at first 
disdained Hitler’s personality. His resentment over Ethiopia, coupled 
with his analysis of the actual power relationships, convinced Mussolini 
that persistence in the Stresa front might end up compelling Italy to bear 
the full brunt of German aggressiveness. Ethiopia therefore marked the 
beginning of Italy’s inexorable march toward Germany, motivated in 
equal parts by acquisitiveness and fear. 


300 



The End of Illusion 

It was in Germany, however, that the Ethiopian fiasco left the most 
lasting impression. The British Ambassador in Berlin reported: “Italy’s 
victory opened a new chapter. It was unavoidable that in a land where 
power is worshipped England’s prestige would sink.” 20 With Italy out of 
the Stresa front, Germany’s sole remaining obstacle on the road to Austria 
and Central Europe was the open door provided by the demilitarized 
Rhineland. And Hitler wasted no time slamming it. 

On the morning of Sunday, March 7, 1936, Hitler ordered his army into 
the demilitarized Rhineland, marking the overthrow of the last remaining 
safeguard of the Versailles settlement. According to the Versailles Treaty, 
German military forces were barred from the Rhineland and a zone of 
fifty kilometers to the east of it. Germany had confirmed this provision at 
Locarno; the League of Nations had endorsed Locarno, and Great Britain, 
France, Belgium, and Italy had guaranteed it. 

If Hitler could prevail in the Rhineland, Eastern Europe would be at 
Germany’s mercy. None of the new states of Eastern Europe stood a 
chance of defending themselves against a revisionist Germany, either 
through their own efforts or in combination with each other. Their only 
hope was that France could deter German aggression by threatening to 
march into the Rhineland. 

Once again, the Western democracies were torn by uncertainty over 
Hitler’s intentions. Technically, he was merely reoccupying German terri- 
tory. Simultaneously, he was offering all sorts of reassurances, including 
the offer of a nonaggression treaty with France. Once again, it was argued 
that Germany would be satisfied as soon as it had been conceded the 
right to defend its own national borders, something every other European 
nation simply took for granted. Did British and French leaders have the 
moral right to risk their peoples’ lives in order to maintain a so blatantly 
discriminatory state of affairs? On the other hand, was it not their moral 
duty to confront Hitler while Germany was not yet fully armed, and 
thereby possibly save untold lives? 

History has given the answer; contemporaries, however, were tor- 
mented by doubt. For, in 1936, Hitler continued to benefit from his 
unique combination of psychotic intuition and demonic willpower. The 
democracies still believed that they were dealing with a normal, if some- 
what excessive, national leader who was seeking to restore his country to 
a position of equality in Europe. Great Britain and France were absorbed 
in trying to read Hitler’s mind. Was he sincere? Did he really want peace? 
To be sure, these were valid questions, but foreign policy builds on 
quicksand when it disregards actual power relationships and relies on 
prophesies of another’s intentions. 


301 

,! 



Diplomacy 


With his uncanny ability to exploit his adversaries’ weaknesses, Hitler 
chose precisely the right moment to reoccupy the Rhineland. The League 
of Nations, bogged down in sanctions against Italy, was far from eager to 
take on a confrontation with another major power. The war in Abyssinia 
had driven a wedge between the Western Powers and Italy, one of the 
guarantors of Locarno. Great Britain, another guarantor, having just re- 
coiled from imposing oil sanctions against Italy at sea, where it was domi- 
nant, would surely be even less eager to risk ground warfare for a cause 
which involved no violation of national boundaries. 

Though no country had a bigger stake in a demilitarized Rhineland 
than France, none was more ambivalent about resisting Germany’s viola- 
tion of it. The Maginot Line bespoke France’s obsession with the strategic 
defensive, and the military equipment and training of the French army 
left little doubt that the First World War had quenched its traditional 
offensive spirit. France seemed resigned to await its fate behind the Magi- 
not Line and to risk nothing beyond its frontiers — not in Eastern Europe 
or, for that matter, in the Rhineland. 

Nevertheless, the reoccupation of the Rhineland represented a bold 
gamble on Hitler’s part. Conscription had been in effect for less than a 
year. The German army was far from ready for war. Indeed, the small 
advance guard entering the demilitarized zone was ordered to conduct a 
fighting retreat at the first signs of French intervention. Hitler, however, 
compensated for his lack of military strength with ample psychological 
daring. He flooded the democracies with proposals hinting at his willing- 
ness to discuss troop limitations in the Rhineland and to bring Germany 
back into the League of Nations. He appealed to widespread distrust of 
the Soviet Union by claiming his move was a riposte to the Franco-Soviet 
Pact of 1935. He offered a fifty-kilometer demilitarized zone on both sides 
of the German frontier and a twenty-five-year nonaggression treaty. The 
demilitarization proposal had the double virtue of hinting that permanent 
peace was only the stroke of a pen away, while neatly demolishing the 
Maginot Line, which backed up against the German frontier. 

Hitler’s interlocutors did not require a great deal of encouragement to 
adopt a passive stance. A convenient alibi here and there suited their 
preference for doing nothing. Ever since Locarno, it had been a cardinal 
principle of French policy never to risk war with Germany except in 
alliance with Great Britain, though British assistance was technically un- 
necessary so long as Germany remained disarmed. In the single-minded 
pursuit of that goal, French leaders had swallowed countless frustrations 
and supported many disarmament initiatives which, in their hearts, they 
knew to be ill-conceived. 


302 



The End of Illusion 


France’s overwhelming psychological dependence on Great Britain 
may explain why it made no military preparations, not even when the 
French Ambassador in Berlin, Andre Frangois-Poncet, warned on Novem- 
ber 21, 1935, that a German move on the Rhineland was imminent — a 
full three and a half months before it actually occurred. 2! Yet France dared 
neither to mobilize nor to undertake precautionary military measures lest 
it be accused of provoking what it feared. France also did not raise the 
issue in negotiations with Germany because it did not know what to do if 
Germany ignored its warnings or declared its intentions. 

What is nearly inexplicable about France’s conduct in 1935, however, 
is why the French general staff made no provisions whatsoever in its own 
internal planning even after Frangois-Poncet’s warning. Did the French 
general staff not believe its own diplomats? Was it because France could 
not bring itself to leave the shelter of its fortifications even in defense of 
the vital buffer zone represented by the demilitarized Rhineland? Or did 
France already feel so utterly doomed that its primary goal had become 
to defer war in the hope that some unforeseeable change would occur in 
its favor — though it would no longer be able to bring such a change 
about by its own actions? 

The towering symbol for this state of mind was, of course, the Maginot 
Line, which France had constructed at huge cost over a period of ten 
years. France had thereby committed itself to the strategic defensive in 
the very year when it had guaranteed the independence of Poland and 
Czechoslovakia. A sign of equal confusion was the incomprehensible 
French decision to stop construction of the Maginot Line at the Belgian 
frontier, which belied all the experiences of the First World War. For, if a 
Franco-German war was indeed possible, then why not a German assault 
through Belgium? If France feared that Belgium would collapse if it indi- 
cated that the main line of defense excluded that country, Belgium could 
have been given the choice of agreeing to the extension of the Maginot 
Line along the Belgian-German frontier, and, if this were rejected, the 
Maginot Line could have been extended to the sea along the Franco- 
Belgian frontier. France did neither. 

What political leaders decide, intelligence services tend to seek to jus- 
tify. Popular literature and films often depict the opposite — policymakers 
as the helpless tools of intelligence experts. In the real world, intelligence 
assessments more often follow than guide policy decisions. This may 
explain the wild exaggeration of German strength that blighted French 
military estimates. At the time of the German reoccupation of the Rhine- 
land, General Maurice Gamelin, the French Commander-in-Chief, told 
civilian leaders that Germany’s trained military manpower already 


* 


303 



Diplomacy 


equaled that of France, and that Germany had more equipment than 
France — an absurd estimate in the second year of German rearmament. 
Policy recommendations flowed from this flawed premise of German 
military might. Gamelin concluded that France must not undertake any 
military countermeasures without general mobilization, a step which its 
political leaders would not risk without British support — not even though 
the German force entering the Rhineland numbered about 20,000, while 
the French standing army could count on 500,000 even without mobiliza- 
tion. 

Everything now came back to the dilemma which had bedeviled the 
democracies for twenty years. Great Britain would recognize only one 
threat to the European balance of power — the violation of France’s bor- 
ders. Determined never to fight for Eastern Europe, it perceived no vital 
British interest in a demilitarized Rhineland serving as a kind of hostage 
in the West. Nor would Great Britain go to war to uphold its own Locarno 
guarantee. Eden had made this clear a month before the occupation of 
the Rhineland. In February 1936, the French government finally roused 
itself to inquire of Great Britain what its position would be if Hitler 
carried out what Frangois-Poncet had reported. Eden’s treatment of the 
potential violation of two international agreements — Versailles and Lo- 
carno — sounded like the opening of a commercial bargain: 

... as the zone was constituted primarily to give security to France and 
Belgium, it is for these two Governments, in the first instance, to make 
up their minds as to what value they attach to, and what price they are 

prepared to pay for, its maintenance It would be preferable for 

Great Britain and France to enter betimes into negotiations with the 
German Government for the surrender on conditions of our rights in 
the zone while such surrender still has a bargaining value. 22 

Eden in effect took the position that the best that could be hoped for was 
a negotiation in which the Allies, in return for giving up established and 
recognized rights (and in which Great Britain refused to honor its own 
guarantee), would receive — what exactly? Time? Other assurances? Great 
Britain left the answer regarding the quid pro quo to France, but con- 
veyed by its conduct that fighting on behalf of solemn obligations in the 
Rhineland was not part of the British strategy. 

After Hitler marched into the Rhineland, Great Britain’s attitude be- 
came even more explicit. The day after the German move, the British 
Secretary of State for War told the German Ambassador: 

. . . though the British people were prepared to fight for France in the 
event of a German incursion into French territory, they would not 


304 



The End of Illusion 


resort to arms on account of the recent occupation of the Rhineland. 

. . . [M]ost of them [the British people] probably took the view that they 
did not care “two hoots” about the Germans reoccupying their own 
territory. 23 

Great Britain’s doubts were soon extended even to countermeasures 
short of war. The Foreign Office told the American charge d’affaires: 
“England would make every endeavour to prevent the imposition of 
military and/or economic sanctions against Germany.” 24 

Foreign Minister Pierre Flandin pleaded France’s case in vain. He pre- 
sciently told the British that, once Germany had fortified the Rhineland, 
Czechoslovakia would be lost and that, soon after, general war would 
become unavoidable. Although he was proved right, it was never alto- 
gether clear whether Flandin was seeking British support for French 
military action or developing a French alibi for inaction. Churchill obvi- 
ously thought the latter, noting dryly, “These were brave words; but 
action would have spoken louder.” 25 

Great Britain was deaf to Flandin’s entreaties. The vast majority of its 
leadership still believed that peace depended on disarmament, and that 
the new international order would have to be based on reconciliation 
with Germany. The British felt that it was more important to rectify the 
mistakes of Versailles than to vindicate the commitments of Locarno. A 
Cabinet minute of March 17 — ten days after Hitler’s move — noted that 
“our own attitude had been governed by the desire to utilize Herr Hitler’s 
offers in order to obtain a permanent settlement.” 26 

What the Cabinet had to say sotto voce, the Opposition felt quite free 
to put forward without restraint. During the course of a debate on defense 
matters in the House of Commons that same month, it was declared by 
Labour member Arthur Greenwood: 

Herr Hitler made a statement sinning with one hand but holding out 
the olive branch with the other, which ought to be taken at face value. 

They may prove to be the most important gestures yet made It is 

idle to say these statements were insincere. . . . The issue is peace and 
not defence. 27 

In other words, the Opposition clearly advocated the revision of Ver- 
sailles and the abandonment of Locarno. They wanted Great Britain to sit 
back and wait for Hitler’s purposes to become clearer. It was a reasonable 
policy as long as its advocates understood that every passing year would 
increase exponentially the ultimate cost of resistance should the policy 
fail. 


305 



Diplomacy 


It is not necessary to retrace step by step the path by which France and 
Great Britain attempted to transform strategic dross into political gold, or 
upheaval into an opportunity for the policy of appeasement. What matters 
is that, at the end of this process, the Rhineland was fortified, Eastern 
Europe had fallen beyond the reach of French military assistance, and 
Italy was moving closer to providing Hitler’s Germany with its first ally. 
Just as France had been reconciled to Locarno by an ambiguous British 
guarantee — whose virtue in British eyes had been that it was less than an 
alliance — so the abrogation of Locarno elicited the even more ambiguous 
British commitment to send two divisions to defend France should the 
French border be violated. 

Once again, Great Britain had skillfully dodged a full commitment to 
defend France. But what exactly did it achieve? France, of course, saw 
through the evasion but accepted it as a halfhearted British step toward 
the long-sought formal alliance. Great Britain interpreted its pledge of 
two divisions as a means of restraining France from undertaking a defense 
of Eastern Europe. For the British commitment would not apply if the 
French army invaded Germany in defense of Czechoslovakia or Poland. 
On the other hand, two British divisions were not remotely relevant to 
the problem of deterring a German attack on France. Great Britain, the 
mother country of the balance-of-power policy, had totally lost touch with 
its operating principles. 

For Hitler, the reoccupation of the Rhineland opened the road to Cen- 
tral Europe, militarily as well as psychologically. Once the democracies 
had accepted it as a fait accompli, the strategic basis for resisting Hitler 
in Eastern Europe disappeared. “If on 7 March you could not defend 
yourself,” asked the Romanian Foreign Minister, Nicolae Titulescu, of his 
French counterpart, “how will you defend us against the aggressor?” 28 
The question grew increasingly unanswerable as the Rhineland was being 
fortified. 

Psychologically, the impact of the democracies’ passive stance was even 
more profound. Appeasement now became an official policy, and rectify- 
ing the inequities of Versailles the conventional wisdom. In the West, 
there was no longer anything left to rectify. But it stood to reason that, if 
France and Great Britain would not defend Locarno, which they had 
guaranteed, there was not a chance of their upholding the Versailles 
settlement in Eastern Europe, which Great Britain had questioned from 
the beginning and had explicitly refused to guarantee on more than 
one occasion — the last time in the undertaking to send two divisions to 
France. 

By now, France had abandoned the Richelieu traditions. It no longer 


306 



The End of Illusion 


relied even on itself, but sought surcease from its dangers through Ger- 
man goodwill. In August 1936, five months after the reoccupation of 
the Rhineland, Dr. Hjalmar Schacht, Germany’s Economics Minister, was 
received in Paris by Leon Blum — Prime Minister of a Popular Front gov- 
ernment containing communists and a Jew. “I am a Marxist and a Jew,” 
said Blum, but “we cannot achieve anything if we treat ideological barri- 
ers as insurmountable.” 29 Blum’s Foreign Minister, Yvon Delbos, was at a 
loss as to how to describe what this meant practically, other than “making 
concessions to Germany piecemeal in order to stave off war.” 30 Nor did 
he explain whether this process had a terminal point. France, the country 
which, for 200 years, had fought innumerable wars in Central Europe in 
order to control its own fate, had retreated to grasping at whatever secu- 
rity could be wrung out of trading piecemeal concessions for time and to 
hoping that, along the way, either German appetites would become sati- 
ated or some other dens ex machina would remove the danger. 

The policy of appeasement which France implemented warily, Great 
Britain pursued eagerly. In 1937, the year after the Rhineland was remili- 
tarized, British Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax symbolized the democra- 
cies’ moral retreat by visiting Hitler’s aerie at Berchtesgaden. He praised 
Nazi Germany “as the bulwark of Europe against Bolshevism” and listed 
a number of issues with respect to which “possible alterations might be 
destined to come about with the passage of time.” Danzig, Austria, and 
Czechoslovakia were specifically mentioned. Halifax’s only caveat related 
to the method by which the changes would be accomplished: “England 
was interested to see that any alterations should come through the course 
of peaceful evolution and that methods should be avoided which might 
cause far-reaching disturbances.” 31 

It would have taxed the comprehension of a less determined leader 
than Hitler why, if it was prepared to concede adjustments in Austria, 
Czechoslovakia, and the Polish Corridor, Great Britain would balk at the 
method Germany used to make those adjustments. Having yielded the 
substance, why should Great Britain draw the line at procedure? What 
possible peaceful argument did Halifax expect could convince the victims 
of the merits of suicide? League orthodoxy and the doctrine of collective 
security had it that it was the method of change which had to be resisted; 
but history teaches that nations go to war in order to resist the fact of 
change. 

By the time of Halifax’s visit to Hitler, France’s strategic situation had 
deteriorated even further. In July 1936, a military coup led by General 
Francisco Franco had triggered the Spanish Civil War. Franco was openly 
supported by large shipments of equipment from Germany and Italy; 


307 



Diplomacy 


soon thereafter, German and Italian “volunteers” were dispatched, and 
fascism seemed poised to spread its ideas by force. France now faced the 
same challenge Richelieu had resisted 300 years earlier— the prospect of 
hostile governments on all its borders. But unlike their great predecessor, 
the French governments of the 1930s dithered, unable to decide which 
they feared more — the dangers they were facing or the means needed to 
redress them. 

Great Britain had participated in the wars of the Spanish succession 
early in the eighteenth century, and against Napoleon in Spain a century 
later. In each case, Great Britain had resisted the most aggressive Euro- 
pean power’s attempt to draw Spain into its orbit. Now it either failed to 
perceive a threat to the balance of power in a fascist victory in Spain or it 
perceived fascism as a lesser threat than a radical left-wing Spain tied to 
the Soviet Union (which seemed to many to be the most likely alterna- 
tive). But, above all, Great Britain wanted to avoid a war. Its Cabinet 
warned France that Great Britain reserved the right to remain neutral if a 
war should result from French arms deliveries to republican Spain — 
even though, under international law, France had every right to sell arms 
to the legitimate Spanish government. France waffled, then proclaimed 
an embargo on arms shipments while periodically acquiescing in its viola- 
tion. That policy, however, only demoralized France’s friends and cost 
France the respect of its adversaries. 

In this atmosphere, French and British leaders met in London on No- 
vember 29-30, 1937, to chart a common course. Neville Chamberlain, 
who had replaced Baldwin as prime minister, came straight to the point. 
He invited discussion of the obligations inherent in France’s alliance with 
Czechoslovakia. This is the sort of query diplomats initiate when they are 
looking for loopholes in order to escape honoring their commitments. 
Presumably, the independence of Austria was not even worth talking 
about. 

French Foreign Minister Delbos responded in a manner which con- 
veyed that he had understood the implications of the question very well 
indeed. Treating the Czech issue in terms of juridical rather than political 
or strategic considerations, he confined himself to a strictly legal exegesis 
of France’s obligation: 

. . . this treaty engaged France in the event of Czechoslovakia being a 
victim of an aggression. If uprisings among the German population 
occurred and were supported by armed intervention from Germany, 
the treaty committed France in a manner to be determined according 
to the gravity of the facts. 32 


308 



The End of Illusion 


Delbos did not discuss the geopolitical importance of Czechoslovakia or 
the impact which France’s abandonment of an ally would have on his 
country’s credibility in maintaining the independence of other countries 
in Eastern Europe. Instead, he stressed that Frances obligations might 
or might not apply to the one realistic existing threat — unrest among 
Czechoslovakia’s German minority backed by German military force. 
Chamberlain grasped at the proffered loophole and turned it into a ratio- 
nale for appeasement: 

It seemed desirable to try to achieve some agreement with Germany 
on Central Europe, whatever might be Germany’s aims, even if she 
wished to absorb some of her neighbours; one could in effect hope to 
delay the execution of German plans, and even to restrain the Reich for 
such a time that its plans might become impractical in the long run. 33 

But if procrastination did not work, what was Great Britain going to do? 
Having conceded that Germany would revise its eastern borders, would 
Great Britain go to war over the timetable? The answer was self-evident 
— countries do not go to war over the rate of change by which something 
they have already conceded is being achieved. Czechoslovakia was 
doomed not at Munich but at London, nearly a year earlier. 

As it happened, Hitler had decided at about the same time to sketch his 
own long-term strategy. The occasion was an assemblage of almost all of 
Germany’s general officers, whom, on November 5, 1937, Hitler treated 
to a candid expose of his strategic views. His adjutant, Hossbach, kept a 
detailed record. No one present had cause to complain afterward that he 
did not know in which direction his leader was heading. For Hitler made 
it clear that his aims went far beyond an attempt to restore Germany’s 
pre -World War I position. What Hitler outlined was the program of Mein 
Kampf — the conquest of large tracts of land in Eastern Europe and in the 
Soviet Union for colonization. Hitler knew very well that such a project 
would encounter resistance: “German policy [would] have to reckon with 
the two hateful antagonists England and France.” 34 He stressed that Ger- 
many had stolen a march on Great Britain and France in its rearmament 
but that the advantage was transitory and would diminish at an accelerat- 
ing rate after 1943. War, therefore, had to start before then. 

Hitler’s generals were disturbed by the vastness of his plans and by the 
imminence of their execution. But they timidly swallowed Hitler’s de- 
signs. Some military leaders toyed vaguely with the idea of a coup once 
Hitler had given the actual order to go to war. But Hitler always moved 
too fast. His stunning early successes deprived his generals of the moral 


309 



Diplomacy 


justification (in their eyes) for such a step — not that making coups against 
constituted authority had ever been a specialty of German generals. 

As for the Western democracies, they did not yet grasp the ideological 
gulf that separated them from the German dictator. They believed in 
peace as an end, and were straining their every nerve to avoid war. Hitler, 
on the other hand, feared peace and craved war. “Mankind has grown 
strong in eternal struggles,” he had written in Mein Kampf; “and it will 
only perish through eternal peace.” 35 

By 1938, Hitler felt strong enough to cross the national boundaries 
established at Versailles. His first target was his native country of Austria, 
which had been left in an anomalous position by the settlements of St.- 
Germain in 1919 and Trianon in 1920 (the equivalent of Versailles for the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire). Until 1806, Austria had been the center of 
the Holy Roman Empire; until 1866, it had been a leading — for some, the 
leading — German state. Expelled from its historic role in Germany by 
Bismarck, it had shifted its emphasis to its Balkan and Central European 
possessions until it lost them as well in the First World War. A one- 
time empire shrunk to its small German-speaking core, Austria had been 
prohibited by the Treaty of Versailles from joining Germany — a clause 
which stood in obvious defiance of the principle of self-determination. 
Even though Anschluss with Germany remained the goal of many on both 
sides of the Austro-German border (including Stresemann), it was again 
blocked by the Allies in 1930. 

Thus, the union of Germany and Austria had about it that sense of 
ambiguity so essential to the success of Hitler’s early challenges. It ful- 
filled the principle of self-determination while undermining the balance 
of power, which statesmen were less and less willing to invoke to justify 
the use of force. After a month of Nazi threats and Austrian concessions 
and second thoughts, on March 12, 1938, German troops marched into 
Austria. There was no resistance, and the Austrian population, much of it 
deliriously joyful, seemed to feel that, shorn of its empire and left helpless 
in Central Europe, it preferred a future as a German province to being a 
minor player on the Central European stage. 

The democracies’ halfhearted protests against Germany’s annexation 
of Austria hardly registered moral concern while shying away from any 
concrete measures. As the death knell of collective security was sounded, 
the League of Nations stood silent while a member country was swal- 
lowed by a powerful neighbor. The democracies now turned doubly 
committed to appeasement in the hope that Hitler would stop his march 
once he had returned all ethnic Germans to the fatherland. 

Destiny chose Czechoslovakia as the subject of that experiment. Like 


310 



The End of Illusion 


other successor states of Austro-Hungary, it was nearly as multinational as 
the Empire had been. Out of a population of some 15 million, nearly a 
third were neither Czech nor Slovak, and the Slovak commitment to the 
state was shaky. Three and a half million Germans, close to a million 
Hungarians, and nearly half a million Poles were incorporated into the 
new state. To exacerbate matters, these minorities dwelled in territories 
contiguous to their ethnic homelands, which rendered the claim that they 
should rejoin their mother countries even more weighty in light of the 
prevailing Versailles orthodoxy of self-determination. 

At the same time, Czechoslovakia was politically and economically the 
most advanced of the successor states. It was genuinely democratic and 
had a standard of living comparable to Switzerland’s. It maintained a large 
army, much of whose excellent equipment was of domestic Czech design 
and manufacture; it had military alliances with France and the Soviet 
Union. In terms of traditional diplomacy, therefore, it was no easy matter 
to abandon Czechoslovakia; in terms of self-determination, it was equally 
difficult to defend it. Emboldened by his successful remilitarization of the 
Rhineland, Hitler began in 1937 to threaten Czechoslovakia on behalf of 
its ethnic Germans. At first, these threats were ostensibly to pressure the 
Czechs into granting special rights to the German minority in “Sudeten- 
land,” as the German propaganda dubbed that territory. But in 1938, 
Hitler turned up the heat of his rhetoric by intimating that he intended to 
annex Sudetenland into the German Reich by force. France was commit- 
ted to protecting Czechoslovakia, as was the Soviet Union, though Soviet 
help for the Czechs had been made conditional on prior French actions. 
Moreover, whether Poland or Romania would have allowed Soviet troops 
to traverse their territory in defense of Czechoslovakia remains very 
doubtful. 

From the start, Great Britain opted for appeasement. On March 22, 
shortly after the annexation of Austria, Halifax reminded the French lead- 
ers that the Locarno guarantee applied only to the French border and 
might lapse if France implemented its treaty commitments in Central 
Europe. A Foreign Office memorandum warned: “Those commitments 
[the Locarno guarantee] are, in their view, no mean contribution to the 
maintenance of peace in Europe and, though they have no intention of 
withdrawing from them, they cannot see their way to add to them.” 36 
Great Britain’s sole security frontier was at the borders of France; if 
France’s security concerns extended any further, specifically, if it tried to 
defend Czechoslovakia, it would be on its own. 

A few months later, the British Cabinet sent a fact-finding mission to 
Prague under Lord Runciman to explore possible means of conciliation. 


311 



Diplomacy 


The practical consequence of that mission was to advertise Great Britain’s 
reluctance to defend Czechoslovakia. The facts were already well known; 
any conceivable conciliation would have required some dismemberment 
of Czechoslovakia. Munich, therefore, was not a surrender but a state of 
mind and the nearly inevitable outgrowth of the democracies’ effort to 
sustain a geopolitically flawed settlement with rhetoric about collective 
security and self-determination. 

Even America, the country most identified with the creation of Czecho- 
slovakia, dissociated itself from the crisis at an early stage. In September, 
President Roosevelt suggested holding a negotiation on some neutral 
ground. 37 Yet, if American embassies abroad were reporting accurately, 
Roosevelt could have had no illusion about the attitudes which France, 
and even more so Great Britain, would bring to any such conference. 
Indeed, Roosevelt reinforced these attitudes by making the statement that 
“the Government of the United States . . . will assume no obligations in 
the conduct of the present negotiations.” 38 

The situation was as if made to order for Hitler’s talent in waging 
psychological warfare. Throughout the summer, he worked to magnify 
hysteria about an imminent war without, in fact, making any specific 
threat. Finally, after Hitler had engaged in a vicious personal attack on the 
Czech leadership at the annual Nazi Party rally in Nuremberg in early 
September 1938, Chamberlain’s nerves snapped. Though no formal de- 
mands had been made and no real diplomatic exchanges had taken place, 
Chamberlain decided to end the tension on September 15 by visiting 
Hitler. Hitler showed his disdain by choosing Berchtesgaden as the meet- 
ing place — the location in Germany farthest from London and the least 
accessible. In those days, traveling from London to Berchtesgaden re- 
quired an airplane trip of five hours, in what turned out to be Chamber- 
lain’s first flight, at the age of sixty-nine. 

After enduring several hours of Hitler’s ranting about the alleged mis- 
treatment of the Sudeten Germans, Chamberlain agreed to dismember 
Czechoslovakia. All Czechoslovak districts with populations that were 
more than 50-percent German were to be returned to Germany. The 
details were to be worked out at a second meeting in a few days’ time, at 
Bad Godesberg, in the Rhineland. It was symptomatic of Hitler’s negotiat- 
ing style that he termed this subsequent locale a “concession”; though 
much closer to London than the first site, it was still well within Germany. 
In the interval, Chamberlain “persuaded” the Czechoslovak government 
to accept his proposal — “sadly” so, in the words of the Czech leaders. 39 

At Bad Godesberg on September 22, Hitler raised the ante and made it 
clear that he sought the abject humiliation of Czechoslovakia. He would 


312 



The End of Illusion 


not agree to the time-consuming procedure of district-by-district plebi- 
scites and frontier demarcations, demanding instead the immediate evac- 
uation of the entire Sudeten territory, the process to start on September 
26 — four days later — to be completed in no more than forty-eight hours. 
Czech military installations were to be left intact for the German armed 
forces. To weaken the rump state even further, Hitler demanded border 
rectifications for Hungary and Poland on behalf of their own minorities. 
When Chamberlain objected to being presented with an ultimatum, Hitler 
snidely pointed to the word “memorandum” typed on top of his presenta- 
tion. After hours of acrimonious argument, Hitler made another “conces- 
sion”: he would give Czechoslovakia until 2:00 p.m. on September 28 
to reply, and until October 1 to begin withdrawing from the Sudeten 
territory. 

Chamberlain could not bring himself to inflict such a total humiliation 
on Czechoslovakia, and French Prime Minister Daladier drew the line 
even more adamantly. For some days, war seemed imminent. Trenches 
were being dug in British parks. This was the period in which Chamber- 
lain made the melancholy comment that Great Britain was being asked to 
go to war for a faraway country about which it knew nothing — this from 
the leader of a country which had fought for centuries on the approaches 
to India without blinking. 

But what was the casus belli? Great Britain had already accepted the 
principle of Czechoslovak dismemberment along with self-determination 
for the Sudeten Germans. Great Britain and France were approaching the 
decision to go to war not in order to sustain an ally but over the few 
weeks’ difference in the rate at which it would be dismantled and a few 
territorial adjustments which were marginal compared to what had al- 
ready been conceded. Perhaps it was just as well that Mussolini took 
everybody off the hook right before the deadline by proposing that a 
conference already being planned between the foreign ministers of Italy 
and Germany be expanded to include the heads of government of France 
(Daladier), Great Britain (Chamberlain), Germany (Hitler), and Italy 
(Mussolini). 

The four leaders met on September 29 in Munich, the birthplace of the 
Nazi Party, the sort of symbolism victors reserve for themselves. Little time 
was spent on negotiations: Chamberlain and Daladier made a halfhearted 
attempt to return to their original proposal; Mussolini produced a paper 
containing Hitler’s Bad Godesberg proposal; Hitler defined the issues in 
the form of a sarcastic ultimatum. Since his deadline of October 1 had 
caused him to be accused of proceeding in an atmosphere of violence, 
he said that the task at hand was “to absolve the action of such a charac- 


313 



Diplomacy 


ter ” 40 In other words, the sole purpose of the conference was to accept 
Hitlers Bad Godesberg program peacefully before he went to war to 
impose it. 

Chamberlain and Daladier’s conduct over the previous months gave 
them no real choice but to accept Mussolini’s draft. Czech representatives 
were left languishing in anterooms while their country was being dis- 
membered. The Soviet Union was not invited at all. Great Britain and 
France assuaged their guilty consciences by offering to guarantee the 
remaining fragment of disarmed Czechoslovakia — a preposterous ges- 
ture coming from nations which had refused to honor the guarantee of 
an intact, well-armed fellow democracy. It goes without saying that the 
guarantee was never implemented. 

Munich has entered our vocabulary as a specific aberration — the pen- 
alty of yielding to blackmail. Munich, however, was not a single act but 
the culmination of an attitude which began in the 1920s and accelerated 
with each new concession. For over a decade, Germany had been throw- 
ing off the restrictions of Versailles one by one: the Weimar Republic had 
rid Germany of reparations, of the Inter-Allied Military Control Commis- 
sion, and of Allied occupation of the Rhineland. Hitler had denounced 
the restrictions on German armaments, the prohibition against con- 
scription, and the demilitarization provisions of Locarno. Even in the 
1920s, Germany had never accepted the Eastern frontiers, and the Allies 
had never insisted that it accept them. Finally, as so often happens, deci- 
sions cumulatively developed their own momentum. 

By conceding that the Versailles settlement was iniquitous, the victors 
eroded the psychological basis for defending it. The victors of the Napole- 
onic Wars had made a generous peace, but they had also organized the 
Quadruple Alliance in order to leave no ambiguity about their determina- 
tion to defend it. The victors of World War I had made a punitive peace 
and, after having themselves created the maximum incentive for revision- 
ism, cooperated in dismantling their own settlement. 

For two decades, the balance of power had been alternately rejected 
and ridiculed; the leaders of the democracies told their peoples that, 
henceforth, the world order would be based on a higher morality. Then, 
when the challenge to the new world order finally came, the democracies 
— Great Britain with conviction, France with doubt tinged by despair — 
had no recourse but to drain the cup of conciliation to demonstrate to 
their peoples that Hitler could not in fact be appeased. 

This explains why the Munich agreement was greeted with such wild 
acclaim by the vast majority of its contemporaries. Franklin Roosevelt was 
among those congratulating Chamberlain: “Good man,” he said. 41 The 


314 



The End of Illusion 


leaders of the British Commonwealth were more effusive. The Prime 
Minister of Canada wrote: 


May I convey to you the warm congratulations of the Canadian people, 
and with them, an expression of their gratitude, which is felt from one 
end of the dominion to the other. My colleagues and Government join 
with me in unbounded admiration at the service you have rendered 
mankind . 42 


Not to be outdone, the Australian Prime Minister said: 


Colleagues and I desire to express our warmest congratulations at the 
outcome of the negotiations at Munich. Australians in common with all 
other peoples of the British empire owe a deep debt of gratitude to 
you for your unceasing efforts to preserve the peace . 43 


Strangely enough, all of the eyewitnesses to the Munich Conference con- 
curred that, far from triumphant, Hitler was morose. He had wanted war, 
which he regarded as indispensable to the realization of his ambitions. 
He probably needed it for psychological reasons as well; nearly all of his 
public utterances, which he viewed as the most vital aspect of his public 
life, related in one way or another to his wartime experiences. Even 
though Hitler’s generals strongly opposed war — to the point of fitfully 
planning to overthrow him should he make a final decision to attack — 
Hitler left Munich with the sense of having been cheated. And, by his own 
inverted reasoning, he may well have been right. For had he managed to 
contrive a war over Czechoslovakia, it is doubtful that the democracies 
could have sustained the sacrifices necessary to win it. The issue was too 
incompatible with the principle of self-determination, and public opinion 
was not sufficiently prepared for the almost certain initial reverses of such 
a war. 

Paradoxically, Munich turned into the psychological end of the line for 
Hitler’s strategy. Until then, he had always been able to appeal to the 
democracies’ sense of guilt about the inequities of Versailles; afterward, 
his only weapon was brute force, and there was a limit to how much 
blackmail even those most afraid of war would accept before taking a 
stand. 

This was especially true of Great Britain. By his conduct at Bad Godes- 
berg and at Munich, Hitler used up the last reserves of British goodwill. 
Despite his fatuous statement of having brought “peace for our time,” 


315 



Diplomacy 


when he returned to London, Chamberlain was determined never to be 
blackmailed again, and launched a major rearmament program. 

In fact, Chamberlain’s conduct in the Munich crisis was more complex 
than posterity has depicted it. Wildly popular in the wake of Munich, 
he was ever after associated with surrender. The democratic public is 
unforgiving in the face of debacles, even when these result from carrying 
out its own immediate wishes. Chamberlain’s reputation collapsed once 
it became clear that he had not achieved “peace for our time.” Hitler 
soon found another pretext for war, and by then Chamberlain could not 
even garner credit for having managed the process by which Great Britain 
was able to weather the storm as a united people and with a restored air 
force. 

In retrospect, it is easy to disparage the often naive pronouncements 
of the appeasers. Yet most of them were decent men earnestly seeking to 
implement the new dispensation contrived by Wilsonian idealism under 
the cloud of general disillusionment with traditional European diplo- 
ma^, and the pervasive sense of spiritual and physical exhaustion. In no 
previous period could a British prime minister have justified an 
agreement, in the way Chamberlain had Munich — as a “removal of those 
suspicions and those animosities which have so long poisoned the air” 44 
— as if foreign policy belonged to a branch of psychology. Still, these 
views had all sprung from an idealistic effort to transcend the legacies of 
Realpolitik and European history by appealing to reason and justice. 

It did not take Hitler long to shatter the illusions of the appeasers, 
thereby hastening his own ultimate downfall. In March 1939, less than six 
months after Munich, Hitler occupied the rump of Czechoslovakia. The 
Czech portion became a German protectorate; Slovakia was designated a 
technically independent state, if a German satellite. Though Great Britain 
and France had offered to guarantee Czechoslovakia at Munich, that 
pledge was never formalized, nor could have been. 

The destruction of Czechoslovakia made no geopolitical sense whatso- 
ever; it showed that Hitler was beyond rational calculation and bent on 
war. Deprived of its defenses and of its French and Soviet alliances, 
Czechoslovakia was bound to slip into the German orbit, and Eastern 
Europe was certain to adjust to the new power realities. The Soviet Union 
had just purged its entire political and military leadership and would not 
be a factor for some time. All Hitler had to do was wait, because, with 
France in effect neutralized, Germany would eventually emerge as the 
dominant power in Eastern Europe. Waiting, of course, was what Hitler 
was emotionally least capable of doing. 

The British and French reaction (spearheaded by London) of drawing 


316 



The End of Illusion 


the line made equally little sense in terms of traditional power politics. 
The seizure of Prague changed neither the balance of power nor the 
foreseeable course of events. But in terms of the Versailles principles, the 
occupation of Czechoslovakia marked a watershed because it demon- 
strated that Hitler sought the domination of Europe and not self-determi- 
nation or equality. 

Hitler’s blunder was not so much to have violated historic principles 
of equilibrium as to have offended the moral premises of British postwar 
foreign policy. His transgression was to incorporate fzcw-German popula- 
tions into the Reich, thereby violating the principle of self-determination, 
on behalf of which all his previous unilateral exactions had been toler- 
ated. Great Britain’s patience was neither inexhaustible nor the result of 
a weak national character; and Hitler had, at last, fulfilled the British 
public’s moral definition of aggression, if not yet the British govern- 
ment’s. After a few days of hesitation, Chamberlain moved his policy into 
line with British public opinion. From that point on, Great Britain would 
resist Hitler not in order to comply with historic theories of equilibrium, 
but, quite simply, because Hitler could no longer be trusted. 

Ironically, the Wilsonian approach to international relations, which had 
facilitated Hitler’s advances beyond what any previous European system 
would have considered acceptable, after a certain point also caused Great 
Britain to draw the line more rigorously than it would have in a world 
based on Realpolitik. If Wilsonianism had prevented earlier resistance to 
Hitler, it also laid the foundation for implacable opposition to him once 
its moral criteria had been unambiguously violated. 

When Hitler laid claim to Danzig in 1939 and sought modification of 
the Polish Corridor, the issues at hand were essentially no different from 
those of the year before. Danzig was a thoroughly German town, and its 
free-city status flew as much in the face of the principle of self-determina- 
tion as had adjudication of the Sudeten territory to Czechoslovakia. 
Though the population of the Polish Corridor was more mixed, some 
adjustment of borders that was more responsive to the principle of self- 
determination was quite possible — at least theoretically. Yet what had 
changed beyond Hitler’s comprehension was that, once he had crossed 
the line of what was morally tolerable, the same moral perfectionism 
which had formerly generated pliability in the democracies transformed 
itself into unprecedented intransigence. After Germany occupied Czecho- 
slovakia, British public opinion would tolerate no further concessions; 
from then on, the outbreak of the Second World War was only a matter 
of time — unless Hitler remained quiescent, which, for him, proved psy- 
chologically impossible. 


317 



Diplomacy 


Before that momentous event could come to pass, however, the inter- 
national system received one more shock — this time from the other great 
revisionist power it had ignored throughout most of the turbulent 1930s 
— Stalin’s Soviet Union. 


318 



THE MAPS 


French Expansion from 1648 to 1801 320 

German Expansion from 1919 to 1939 321 

William Ill’s Grand Alliance from 1701 to 1713 322 

Alliances in the 1950s 323 

Europe After the Congress of Vienna, 1815 324 

Europe on the Eve of the First World War, 1914 326 

The Cold War World from 1945 to 1989 328 

The Post-Cold War World 330 


319 








Power Vacuums Both the Peace of Westphalia (1648) and the Treaty of Versailles (1919) created power vacuums on the borders of military 
heavyweights. The stronger powers — Louis XIV s France and Hitler’s Germany — found the temptation to expand at the expense of weaker neighbors 
irresistible. 














Containment Old and New In order to rein in chronically expansionist powers, William III of England built a “Grand Alliance” to “contain” France’s 

outward thrusts. The United States similarly built a system of alliances to contain the Soviet Union in the 1950s, 











UNITED . 

kingdom: 


DENMARK 




Frankfurt, 


Munich 


^ y 0 3 emT\ 

r\-./y w ‘ 

,M i lan^ A ^ A 
v\ Verona 




S FA1 N 


'Rome 


.A 4:iies 


Balance of Power and the Congress System The peacemakers at Vienna consoli- 
dated Central Europe into the German Confederation, ending the power vacuum 





block French aggression. European congresses, the last of which was held in Berlin 
in 1878, met periodically to sort out solutions to Europe’s major conflicts. 



DENMARK 


BRITAIN 


€> _AAaclrul 


When war broke out in 1914, the Franco-Russian 


Alliance was already twenty-three years old, and the Austro-German Alliance was 


thirtv-five years old. A newcomer to Continental alliances, Great Britain joined the 











>( VENE^ 
VZUECA^ 




Spheres ofIn fluen ce 
and Conflict- 


Cold War Spheres of Influence In the years following 1945, the United States and 
the Soviet Union established spheres of influence in Europe. In the 1950s, spheres 
were consolidated in Northeast Asia. In the 1960s, the theater of competition moved 





HU.AJ 


' tic»'' 


KAN ( *< 


ALGi^RIA ) 


I NDIA 


MALI 


1 SENEQAC;^ 
I.QUINEA ' 7v| 
3 . LIBERIA '• I 
H IVORY COAST! 
5- CAMEROON \ 
6. UGANDA I 


;aire 


t-TAN2SA|4(A : 


&MI 


"The Colo 

WarWorld 

-from 19^-5 to 1989 


to Southeast Asia, where spheres were eventually consolidated. In the 1970s, the two 
superpowers battled for influence in the Middle East and Africa; in the 1980s, in 
Central America. 




( Th e 'Post- 
ColdWar, 
Wore© 


:'CU0A< 


mmm 


new '. ‘ ; 

•£: Al.AN t> 


CUX^ 




HUNCjARV 


. s 


The Post-Cold War World With the collapse of the Soviet sphere of influence in 
1989, new instability has emerged in Central Asia, the Caucasus, the Persian Gulf, the 




Horn of Africa, and the Balkans. In the meantime, new power centers have developed 
in Japan, China, and Western Europe, making for a multipolar world 








CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

Stalin’ s Bazaar 


If ideology necessarily determined foreign policy, Hitler and Stalin 
would never have joined hands any more than Richelieu and the Sultan 
of Turkey would have three centuries earlier. But common geopolitical 
interest is a powerful bond, and it was pushing the old enemies, Hitler 
and Stalin, inexorably together. 

When it happened, the democracies were incredulous; their stunned 
surprise indicated that they had no better understanding of Stalin’s men- 
tality than they had of Hitler’s. Stalin’s career, like Hitler’s, had been 
forged on the fringes of society, though it took him much longer to reach 
absolute power. Hitler’s reliance on demagogic brilliance caused him 
to stake everything on a single throw of the dice. Stalin prevailed by 
undermining his rivals from deep within the communist bureaucracy, 
where the other contenders for power had ignored him because they did 
not at first view the sinister figure from Georgia as a serious rival. Hitler 
succeeded by overwhelming his associates with elemental single-mind- 
edness; Stalin accrued power by dint of implacable anonymity. 

Hitler transposed his Bohemian work habits and mercurial personality 
into decision-making, endowing his government with a fitful and occa- 


332 




Stalin's Bazaar 


sionally dilettantish quality. Stalin incorporated the rigorous catechisms 
of his early religious training into the brutal exegeses of the Bolshevik 
world view, and transformed ideology into an instrument of political 
control. Hitler thrived on the succor of the adoration of the masses. Stalin 
was far too paranoid to rely on so personal an approach. He craved 
ultimate victory far more than immediate approbation, and preferred to 
achieve it by destroying, one by one, all of his potential rivals. 

Hitler’s ambitions needed to be fulfilled within his own lifetime; in his 
statements, he represented only himself Stalin was equally megalomania- 
cal but viewed himself as a servant of historical truth. Unlike Hitler, Stalin 
had incredible patience. Unlike the leaders of the democracies, he was at 
all times prepared to undertake a meticulous study of power relation- 
ships. Precisely because he was so convinced that his ideology embodied 
historical truth, Stalin ruthlessly pursued the Soviet national interest un- 
encumbered by what he considered hypocritical moral baggage or senti- 
mental attachments. 

Stalin was indeed a monster; but in the conduct of international rela- 
tions, he was the supreme realist — patient, shrewd, and implacable, the 
Richelieu of his period. Without knowing it, the Western democracies 
were tempting fate by counting on an irreconcilable ideological conflict 
between Stalin and Hitler, by teasing Stalin with a French pact that fore- 
swore military cooperation, by excluding the Soviet Union from the Mu- 
nich Conference, and by rather ambivalently entering into military talks 
with Stalin only when it was already too late to prevent him from making 
a pact with Hitler. The leaders of the democracies confused Stalin’s pon- 
derous, mildly theological speeches with rigidity of both thought and 
policy. Yet Stalin’s rigidity extended only to communist ideology. His 
communist convictions enabled him to be extraordinarily flexible in his 
tactics. 

Beyond these psychological aspects, Stalins character had a philosophi- 
cal core which made him nearly incomprehensible to Western leaders. 
As an old Bolshevik, he had suffered imprisonment, exile, and privation 
on behalf of his convictions for decades before coming to power. Priding 
themselves on having a superior insight into the dynamics of history, the 
Bolsheviks saw their role as helping along the objective historical process. 
In their view, the difference between themselves and noncommunists 
was akin to the difference between scientists and laymen. In analyzing 
physical phenomena, the scientist does not actually bring them about; his 
understanding of why they occur enables him occasionally to manipulate 
the process, though never according to anything but the phenomena’s 
own inherent laws. In the same spirit, the Bolsheviks thought of them- 


333 



Diplomacy 


selves as scientists of history — helping to make its dynamics apparent, 
perhaps even to speed them up, but never to change their immutable 
direction. 

Communist leaders presented themselves as implacable, beyond com- 
passion, and as unswerving from their historical task as they were unsway- 
able by conventional arguments, especially when these came from 
nonbelievers. The communists felt they had an edge in the conduct of 
diplomacy because they thought they understood their interlocutors bet- 
ter than they could ever understand themselves. In the communist mind, 
concessions could only be made, if at all, to “objective reality,” never to 
the persuasiveness of the diplomats with whom they were negotiating. 
Diplomacy thus belonged to the process by which the existing order 
would eventually be overturned; whether it would be overthrown by a 
diplomacy of peaceful coexistence or by military conflict depended on 
the assessment of the relation of forces. 

One principle in Stalin’s universe of inhuman and cold-blooded calcu- 
lation was, however, immutable: nothing could justify fighting hopeless 
battles for dubious causes. Philosophically, the ideological conflict with 
Nazi Germany was part of a general conflict with the capitalists that, as far 
as Stalin was concerned, embraced France and Great Britain. Which coun- 
try ended up bearing the brunt of Soviet hostility depended entirely on 
which one Moscow considered the greater threat at any given moment. 

Morally, Stalin did not distinguish among the various capitalist states. 
His true opinion of the countries extolling the virtues of universal peace 
was evident in his reaction to the signing of the Kellogg-Briand Pact in 
1928: 

They talk about pacifism; they speak about peace among European 

states. Briand and [Austen] Chamberlain are embracing each other 

All this is nonsense. From European history we know that every time 
that treaties envisaging a new arrangement of forces for new wars have 
been signed, these treaties have been called treaties of peace . . . [al- 
though] they were signed for the purpose of depicting new elements 
of the coming war . 1 

Stalin’s ultimate nightmare, of course, was a coalition of all the capitalist 
countries attacking the Soviet Union simultaneously. In 1927, Stalin de- 
scribed Soviet strategy in the same way Lenin had a decade earlier: “. . . a 
great deal . . . depends on whether we shall succeed in deferring the inev- 
itable war with the capitalist world . . . until the time . . . when the capital- 
ists start fighting each other ” 2 To encourage this prospect, the Soviet 


334 



Stalin's Bazaar 


Union had concluded the Rapallo agreement with Germany in 1922 and 
the neutrality treaty of Berlin in 1926, which it renewed in 1931, explicitly 
promising to stay out of a capitalist war. 

As far as Stalin was concerned, Hitler’s vituperative anticommunism did 
not constitute an insuperable obstacle to good relations with Germany. 
When Hitler came to power, Stalin wasted no time making conciliatory 
gestures. “(W]e are far from being enthusiastic about the fascist regime in 
Germany,” Stalin stated at the Seventeenth Party Congress in January 
1934. “[I]t is not a question of fascism here, if only for the reason that 
fascism in Italy, for example, has not prevented the USSR from establish- 
ing the best relations with that country. . . . Our orientation in the past 
and our orientation at the present time is towards the USSR, and the USSR 
alone. And if the interests of the USSR demand rapprochement with one 
country or another which is not interested in disturbing peace, we adopt 
this course without hesitation.” 3 

Stalin, the great ideologue, was in fact putting his ideology in the 
service of Realpolitik. Richelieu or Bismarck would have had no difficulty 
understanding his strategy'. It was the statesmen representing the democ- 
racies who were wearing ideological blinkers; having rejected power 
politics, they thought that the precondition to good relations among na- 
tions was a general belief in the premises of collective security, and that 
ideological hostility would preclude any possibility of practical coopera- 
tion between the fascists and the communists. 

The democracies were wrong on both counts. In due course, Stalin did 
move into the anti-Hitler camp, but only very reluctantly and after his 
overtures to Nazi Germany had been rebuffed. Convinced at last that 
Hitler’s anti-Bolshevik rhetoric might well be serious, Stalin set about 
constructing the widest possible coalition to contain it. His new strategy 
emerged at the Seventh (and last) Congress of the Communist Interna- 
tional in July and August 1935. 4 Calling for a united front of all peace- 
loving peoples, it signaled the abandonment of the communist tactics of 
the 1920s, when, in an effort to paralyze European parliamentary institu- 
tions, Communist Parties had consistently voted with antidemocratic 
groups, including the fascists. 

The principal spokesman of the new Soviet foreign policy was Maxim 
Litvinov, who had been appointed Foreign Minister in order to play just 
this role. Urbane, fluent in English, and Jewish, he was of bourgeois 
origin and was married to the daughter of a British historian. His formal 
credentials were better suited to a class enemy than a man destined for a 
career in Soviet diplomacy. Under Litvinov’s stewardship, the Soviet 
Union joined the League of Nations, and became one of the most vocal 


335 



Diplomacy 


proponents of collective security. Stalin was quite prepared to resort to 
Wilsonian rhetoric in order to gain insurance against the prospect that 
Hitler might actually carry out what he had written in Mein Kampf and 
make the Soviet Union his principal target. As the political scientist Robert 
Legvold has pointed out, Stalin’s purpose was to extract maximum assis- 
tance from the capitalist world, not to make peace with it. 5 

A deep sense of mutual distrust pervaded the relations between the 
democracies and the Soviet Union. Stalin signed pacts with France in 
1935 and with Czechoslovakia the following year. But the French leaders 
of the 1930s took the opposite course and refused military staff talks. 
Inevitably, Stalin interpreted this as an invitation to Hitler to attack the 
Soviet Union first. To reinsure himself, Stalin made Soviet help to Czecho- 
slovakia dependent on the prior fulfillment of French obligations to 
Czechoslovakia. This, of course, gave Stalin the option of leaving the 
imperialists to fight it out among themselves. The Franco-Soviet treaty 
was hardly a relationship made in heaven. 

France’s willingness to create political ties with the Soviet Union while 
simultaneously rejecting a military alliance with it illustrates the never- 
never land into which the foreign policy of the democracies had drifted 
between the wars. The democracies valued the rhetoric of collective 
security but recoiled from giving it an operational content. World War I 
should have taught Great Britain and France that, even in alliance, fighting 
Germany by themselves was a precarious enterprise. After all, Germany 
had nearly prevailed in 1918, despite the fact that America had joined the 
Allies. To consider fighting Germany without Soviet or American assis- 
tance combined the Maginot Line mentality with a gross overestimation 
of their strength. 

Only extremely wishful thinking on the part of the democracies’ lead- 
ers could have led to the widespread belief that Stalin — the original 
Bolshevik and a staunch believer in so-called objective, material factors 
— could have converted to the juridical and moral doctrine of collective 
security. For Stalin and his colleagues had reasons other than ideology' to 
be unenthusiastic about the established international order. After all, the 
Soviet frontiers with Poland had been imposed by force and Romania had 
seized Bessarabia, which the Soviets considered their own. 

Nor did the potential German victims in Eastern Europe desire Soviet 
help. The combination of the Versailles settlement and the Russian Revo- 
lution had created an insoluble problem for any system of collective 
security in Eastern Europe: without the Soviet Union, it could not work 
militarily; with it, it could not work politically. 

Western diplomacy did little to ease Stalin’s paranoia about a capitalist 


336 



Stalin's Bazaar 


anti-Soviet cabal. The Soviet Union was not consulted in the diplomacy 
surrounding the abrogation of the Locarno Pact, and was excluded alto- 
gether from the Munich Conference. It was brought into discussions for 
a security system in Eastern Europe only grudgingly and quite late, after 
the occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1939. 

Nevertheless, it is a misreading of Stalin’s psychology to blame the 
Hitler-Stalin Pact largely on Western policy. Stalin’s paranoia was amply 
demonstrated by his elimination of all potential domestic rivals and the 
murder or deportation of millions more who opposed him only in his 
fantasies. In spite of that, when it came to foreign policy, Stalin proved 
himself the ultimate cold calculator and took great pride in not letting 
himself be provoked into any rash moves, especially by capitalist leaders 
whose understanding of the correlation of forces he rated far below his 
own. 

One can only speculate what Stalin might have intended at the time of 
Munich. Yet his least likely course at the moment when he was convulsing 
his country with purge after purge would have been automatic and sui- 
cidal implementation of a mutual assistance treaty. Since the treaty with 
Czechoslovakia committed the Soviet Union only after France was at war, 
it left Stalin with a number of options. For instance, he could demand 
passage through Romania and Poland and use the nearly certain refusal 
of those countries as an alibi to await the outcome of battles in Central 
and Western Europe. Or else, depending on his assessment of the conse- 
quences, he could recapture the Russian territories lost to Poland and 
Romania in the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, much as he did a 
year later. The most unlikely outcome was one in which the Soviet Union 
would mount the barricades as the last defender of the Versailles territo- 
rial settlement in the name of collective security. 

No doubt, Munich confirmed Stalin’s suspicions about the democra- 
cies. Yet nothing could fundamentally deflect him from seeking to fulfill, 
at nearly any cost, what he considered his Bolshevik duty — pitting the 
capitalists against each other and keeping the Soviet Union from becom- 
ing a victim of their wars. The effect of Munich, therefore, was primarily 
to alter Stalin’s tactics. For now he opened up a bazaar for bids on a 
Soviet pact — one which the democracies had no hope of winning if Hitler 
was prepared to make a serious offer. When, on October 4, 1938, the 
French Ambassador called on the Soviet Foreign Ministry to explain the 
Munich agreement, he was greeted by Vladimir Potemkin, the Deputy 
Commissar for Foreign Affairs, with these menacing words: “My poor 
friend, what have you done? For us, I see no other outcome than a fourth 
partition of Poland.” 6 


337 



Diplomacy 


The epigram was a glimpse into Stalin’s icy approach to foreign policy. 
After Munich, Poland was certain to become Germany’s next target. Since 
Stalin wanted neither to confront the German army at the existing Soviet 
frontier nor to fight Hitler, a fourth partition of Poland was the only 
alternative (indeed, similar reasoning had led Catherine the Great to 
promote the first partition of Poland with Prussia and Austria in 1772). 
The fact that Stalin waited an entire year for Hitler to make the first move 
attested to the steely nerves with which he conducted his foreign policy. 

With his objective firmly in place, Stalin next moved swiftly to withdraw 
the Soviet Union from the front line. On January 27, 1939, the London 
News Chronicle published an article by its diplomatic correspondent 
(known to be close to Moscow’s ambassador, Ivan Maisky) outlining a 
possible deal between the Soviet Union and Germany. The author re- 
peated Stalin’s standard thesis that there was no significant difference 
between the Western democracies and the fascist dictators and used it to 
release the Soviet Union from any automatic commitment to collective 
security: 

At present, the Soviet government evidently has no intention of giving 
any help to Great Britain and France if the latter come into conflict with 
Germany and Italy — From the point of view of the Soviet government, 
there is no great difference between the positions of the British and 
French governments on the one hand and the German and Italian on 
the other, which would justify serious sacrifices in the defence of West- 
ern democracy. 7 

Since the Soviet Union saw no need to choose between the various 
capitalists on the basis of ideology, disagreements between Moscow and 
Berlin could be solved on a practical basis. Lest the point be missed, Stalin 
took the unprecedented step of having the article reprinted verbatim in 
Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper. 

On March 10, 1939 — five days before Hitler occupied Prague — Stalin 
stepped forward with his own authoritative statement of Moscow’s new 
strategy. The occasion was the Eighteenth Party Congress, the first such 
meeting held since Stalin’s endorsement of collective security and 
“united fronts” five years earlier. The delegates’ feelings must have been 
dominated by relief at still being alive, for the purges had decimated their 
ranks: only thirty-five of the 2,000 delegates from five years before were 
now in attendance; 1,100 of the remainder had been arrested for counter- 
revolutionary activities; ninety-eight of the 131 members of the Central 
Committee had been liquidated, as had been three out of five marshals 


338 



Stalin's Bazaar 


of the Red Army, all eleven deputy commissars for defense, all military 
district commanders, and seventy-five out of the eighty members of the 
Supreme Military Council. 8 The Eighteenth Party Congress was hardly a 
celebration of continuity. Its attendees were vastly more concerned with 
the requirements of their own personal survival than with the arcane 
subtleties of foreign policy. 

As had been the case in 1934, Stalin’s basic theme before this terrified 
audience was the peaceful intentions of the Soviet Union in a hostile 
international environment. His conclusions, however, marked a radical 
break from the collective security concept of the previous Party Congress. 
For, in effect, Stalin declared Soviet neutrality in the conflict among the 
capitalists: 

The foreign policy of the Soviet Union is clear and explicit. We stand 
for peace and the strengthening of business relations with all countries. 
That is our position; and we shall adhere to this position as long as 
these countries maintain like relations with the Soviet Union and as 
long as they make no attempt to trespass on the interests of our coun- 
try . 9 

To make certain that the obtuse capitalist leaders did not miss his point, 
Stalin repeated almost verbatim the central argument of the Neu>s Chroni- 
cle article: that, since the democracies and Germany had similar social 
structures, the differences between Germany and the Soviet Union were 
no more insurmountable than the differences between any other capital- 
ist country and the Soviet Union. Summing up, he voiced his determina- 
tion to retain freedom of action and to sell Moscow’s goodwill in any 
impending war to the highest bidder. In an ominous phrase, Stalin vowed 
“[tjo be cautious and not allow our country to be drawn into conflicts by 
warmongers who are accustomed to have others pull the chestnuts out 
of the fire for them.” 10 In effect, Stalin was inviting Nazi Germany to make 
a bid. 

Stalin’s new policy differed from the old primarily in terms of empha- 
sis. Even in the heyday of his support for collective security and “united 
fronts,” Stalin had always hedged Soviet commitments in a way that per- 
mitted him to retain the option of making a separate deal after the war 
had begun. But now, in the spring of 1939, when the remaining fragment 
of Czechoslovakia had not yet been occupied by Germany, Stalin was 
going one step further. He began maneuvering for the opportunity to 
make a separate deal before the war. No one should have complained 
that Stalin had kept his intentions secret; the shock of the democracies 


339 



Diplomacy 


was due to their inability to understand that Stalin, the passionate revolu- 
tionary, was above all a cold-blooded strategist. 

After the occupation of Prague, Great Britain abandoned its policy of 
appeasement toward Germany. The British Cabinet now exaggerated the 
imminence of a Nazi threat to the same degree to which it had previously 
underestimated it. It was convinced that Hitler would immediately follow 
the destruction of Czechoslovakia with another assault — some thought 
on Belgium, others on Poland. In late March 1939, rumor had it that the 
target was Romania, which did not even share a border with Germany. 
Yet it would have been highly uncharacteristic of Hitler to attack a second, 
unrelated, target quite so soon. More typically, his tactic was to allow the 
impact of one coup to demoralize his next intended victim before striking 
again. At any rate, we know in retrospect that Great Britain had far more 
time to plan its strategy than its leaders believed. Moreover, had the 
British Cabinet carefully analyzed Stalin’s pronouncements at the Eigh- 
teenth Party Congress, it would have realized that, the more eagerly Great 
Britain organized resistance to Hitler, the more aloof Stalin was likely to 
be in order to magnify his leverage vis-a-vis both sides. 

The British Cabinet now faced a fundamental strategic choice, though 
there is no evidence that it was aware of it. In resisting Hitler, it had to 
decide whether its approach would be based on constructing a system of 
collective security or a traditional alliance. If it chose the former, the 
widest group of nations would be invited to join the anti-Nazi resistance; 
if it chose the latter, Britain would have to make compromises — to har- 
monize its interests with those of potential allies, like the Soviet Union. 

The Cabinet opted for collective security. On March 17, notes were 
sent to Greece, Yugoslavia, France, Turkey, Poland, and the Soviet Union 
inquiring how they would respond to the supposed threat to Romania — 
the premise being that they must all share the same interests and repre- 
sent a single attitude. Britain suddenly seemed to be offering what it had 
withheld since 1918 — a territorial guarantee for all of Eastern Europe. 

The responses of the various nations once again demonstrated the 
essential weakness of the doctrine of collective security — the assumption 
that all nations, and at a minimum all the potential victims, have the same 
interest in resisting aggression. Every Eastern European nation presented 
its own problems as a special case and emphasized national, not collec- 
tive, concerns. Greece made its reaction dependent on Yugoslavia’s; Yu- 
goslavia inquired as to Great Britain’s intentions — bringing matters back 
to their starting point. Poland indicated that it was not prepared to take 
sides between Great Britain and Germany, or to engage itself in the 
defense of Romania. Poland and Romania would not agree to Soviet 


340 



Stalin's Bazaar 


participation in the defense of their countries. And the response of the 
Soviet Union was to propose a conference in Bucharest of all the coun- 
tries to which the British inquiry had been addressed. 

This was a clever maneuver. If the conference took place, it would 
establish the principle of Soviet participation in the defense of countries 
that were as afraid of Moscow as they were of Berlin; if its initiative was 
rejected, the Kremlin would have an excuse to stay aloof while pursuing 
its preferred option of exploring accommodation with Germany. Moscow 
was in effect asking the countries of Eastern Europe to identify Germany 
as the principal threat to their existence, and to challenge it before Mos- 
cow had clarified its intentions. Since no Eastern European country was 
prepared to do this, the Bucharest conference never came about. 

The unenthusiastic responses caused Neville Chamberlain to pursue 
other arrangements. On March 20, he suggested a declaration of intent 
by Great Britain, France, Poland, and the Soviet Union to consult with 
each other in the event of any threat to the independence of any Euro- 
pean state, “with a view to taking common action.” A revival of the Triple 
Entente of pre-World War I, the proposal said nothing about either the 
military strategy that would be implemented should deterrence fail or 
the prospects for cooperation between Poland and the Soviet Union, 
which was simply taken for granted. 

For its part, Poland, whose romantic overestimation of its military ca- 
pacities Great Britain seemed to share, refused joint action with the Soviet 
Union, facing Great Britain with a choice between Poland and the Soviet 
Union. If it guaranteed Poland, Stalin’s incentive to participate in the 
common defense would decline. Since Poland was situated between Ger- 
many and the Soviet Union, Great Britain would be committed to go to 
war before Stalin needed to make any decision. On the other hand, if 
Great Britain concentrated on a Soviet pact, Stalin was sure to demand 
his pound of flesh for helping the Poles by pushing the Soviet border 
westward, toward the Curzon Line. 

Spurred on by public outrage and convinced that retreat would further 
weaken Great Britain’s position, the British Cabinet refused to sacrifice 
any more countries, whatever the dictates of geopolitics. At the same 
time, British leaders suffered from the misapprehension that Poland was 
somehow militarily stronger than the Soviet Union, and that the Red Army 
had no offensive value — a plausible enough assessment in light of the 
massive purges of Soviet military leaders that had just taken place. Above 
all, the British leaders deeply distrusted the Soviet Union. “I must con- 
fess,” Chamberlain wrote, “to the very most profound distrust of Russia. I 
have no belief whatever in her ability to maintain an effective offensive, 


341 



Diplomacy 


even if she wanted to. And I distrust her motives, which seem to me to 
have little connection with our ideas of liberty, and to be concerned only 
with getting everyone else by the ears.” 11 

Believing itself to be under a severe time constraint, Great Britain took 
the plunge and announced the kind of peacetime Continental guarantee 
it had consistently rejected since the Treaty of Versailles. Worried about 
reports of an imminent German attack on Poland, Chamberlain did not 
even pause to negotiate a bilateral alliance with Poland. Instead, he 
drafted a unilateral guarantee to Poland with his own hand on March 30, 
1939, and presented it to Parliament the next day. The guarantee was 
meant to be a stopgap to deter Nazi aggression, a threat which turned out 
to be based on false information. The guarantee was to be followed by a 
more leisurely attempt to create a broad system of collective security. 
Soon thereafter, unilateral guarantees based on the same reasoning were 
extended to Greece and Romania. 

Driven by moral outrage and strategic confusion, Great Britain thus 
slid into guarantees on behalf of countries which all of its postwar prime 
ministers had insisted it could not, and would not, defend. The post- 
Versailles realities of Eastern Europe had grown so remote to the British 
experience that the Cabinet did not even realize it had made a choice 
which would multiply Stalin’s options toward Germany and ease his with- 
drawal from the proposed common front. 

Great Britain’s leaders took Stalin’s participation in their strategy so 
much for granted that they believed they could control both its timing 
and scope. Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax urged that the Soviet Union be 
held in reserve and “invited to lend a hand in certain circumstances in 
the most convenient form.” 12 What Halifax had specifically in mind was 
supplying munitions, not moving Soviet troops to beyond their border. 
He did not explain what incentive the Soviet Union might have to play so 
subsidiary a role. 

In fact the British guarantee to Poland and Romania removed whatever 
incentive the Soviets might have had to enter into a serious negotiation 
about an alliance with the Western democracies. For one thing, it guaran- 
teed all the borders of the Soviet Union’s European neighbors except for 
the Baltic States, and, at least on paper, thwarted Soviet ambitions as 
much as it did Germany’s. (The fact that Great Britain could have been 
oblivious to this reality was a measure of the degree to which the “united 
front of peace-loving countries” had taken hold in the Western mind.) 
But, more important, the unilateral British guarantees were a gift to Stalin 
because they provided him with the maximum he would have asked for 
in any negotiation which started, as most negotiations do, with an empty 


342 



Stalin's Bazaar 


slate. If Hitler moved east, Stalin was now assured of Great Britain’s 
commitment to go to war well before the Soviet frontier was reached. 
Stalin thus garnered the benefit of a de facto alliance with Great Britain 
without any need to reciprocate. 

Great Britain’s guarantee to Poland was based on four assumptions, 
each of which turned out to be wrong: that Poland was a significant 
military power, perhaps more so than the Soviet Union; that France and 
Great Britain together were strong enough to defeat Germany without 
the help of other allies; that the Soviet Union had an interest in main- 
taining the status quo in Eastern Europe; and that the ideological gulf 
between Germany and the Soviet Union was ultimately so unbridgeable 
that the Soviet Union would join the anti-Hitler coalition sooner or later. 

Poland was heroic, but it was not a significant military power. Its task 
was made all the less manageable because the French general staff misled 
Poland about its actual intentions, implying that some sort of French 
offensive was in prospect. The defensive strategy to which France was in 
fact committed would oblige Poland to face the full fury of the German 
onslaught alone — a task which Western leaders should have known was 
far beyond Poland’s capacities. At the same time, Poland could not be 
induced to accept Soviet help, because its leaders were convinced (cor- 
rectly, as it turned out) that any “liberating” Soviet army would turn into 
an army of occupation. And the democracies’ assessment was that they 
could win a war against Germany by themselves even if Poland were 
defeated. 

The Soviets’ interest in preserving the status quo in Eastern Europe 
ended with the Eighteenth Party Congress — if, indeed, it had ever really 
existed. Crucially, Stalin did in fact have the option of turning to Hitler 
and, after the British guarantee to Poland, could play his Nazi card with 
considerable safety. His task was eased because the Western democracies 
refused to grasp his strategy — which would have been quite clear to 
Richelieu, Metternich, Palmerston, or Bismarck. Quite simply, it was to 
make certain that the Soviet Union was always the last major power 
to commit itself, thereby achieving the freedom of action for a bazaar in 
which either Soviet cooperation or Soviet neutrality would be offered to 
the highest bidder. 

Before the British guarantee to Poland, Stalin had had to be wary lest 
Soviet overtures to Germany cause the democracies to wash their hands 
of Eastern Europe, leaving him to face Hitler alone. After the guarantee, 
he had an assurance not only that Great Britain would fight for his West- 
ern frontier but that the war would start 600 miles to the west, on the 
German-Polish frontier. 


343 



Diplomacy 


Stalin had only two remaining concerns. First, he had to make certain 
that the British guarantee to Poland was solid; second, he would have to 
find out whether the German option really existed. Paradoxically, the 
more Great Britain demonstrated its good faith with respect to Poland, 
which it was required to do in order to deter Hitler, the more maneuver- 
ing room Stalin gained with respect to Germany. Great Britain sought to 
preserve the Eastern European status quo. Stalin aimed for the greatest 
range of choices and to overturn the Versailles settlement. Chamberlain 
wanted to prevent war. Stalin, who felt war was inevitable, wanted the 
benefits of war without participating in it. 

Stalin decorously pirouetted between the two sides. But in the end, it 
was no contest. Hitler alone was in a position to offer him the territorial 
gain in Eastern Europe that he was after, and for this he was quite willing 
to pay the price of a European war which spared the Soviet Union. On 
April 14, Great Britain proposed a unilateral declaration by the Soviet 
Union that “in the event of any act of aggression against any European 
neighbour of the Soviet Union, which was resisted by the country con- 
cerned, the assistance of the Soviet government would be available.” 13 
Stalin refused to put his head inside a noose and rejected the one-sided 
and naive proposal. On April 17, he replied with a counteroffer in three 
pans: an alliance among the Soviet Union, France, and Great Britain; a 
military convention to give it effect; and a guarantee for all the countries 
between the Baltic and the Black seas. 

Stalin had to know that such a proposal would never be accepted. First 
of all, the Eastern European countries did not want it; second, negotiating 
a detailed military convention would have taken more time than was 
available; and, finally, Great Britain had not been withholding an alliance 
from France for the past decade and a half to give one now to a country 
it had deemed worthy of no more important a role than as a supplier of 
munitions. “It cannot be pretended,” said Chamberlain, “that such an 
alliance is necessary in order that the smaller countries of Eastern Europe 
should be furnished with munitions.” 14 

Overcoming their reservations, the British leaders inched week by 
week toward meeting Stalin’s terms while he continually raised the ante. 
In May, Vyacheslav Molotov, Stalin’s trusted confidant, had replaced Litvi- 
nov as Foreign Minister, signifying that Stalin had personally taken charge 
of the negotiations and that good personal relations between the negotia- 
tors were no longer a Soviet priority. In his abrasively pedantic manner, 
Molotov demanded that all the countries along the Soviet Union’s western 
border be guaranteed by both sides and that they be specifically enumer- 
ated (ensuring a formal refusal from at least some of them). He also 


344 



Stalin's Bazaar 


insisted that the term “aggression” be expanded to cover “indirect aggres- 
sion,” defined as any concession to German threats, even if force had not 
actually been used. Since the Soviet Union reserved for itself the defini- 
tion of what was meant by “yielding,” Stalin was also in effect demanding 
an unlimited right of intervention in the domestic affairs of all the Soviet 
Union’s European neighbors. 

By July, Stalin had learned enough. He knew that the British leaders 
would consent — however reluctantly — to an alliance on close to his 
terms. On July 23, the Soviet and Western negotiators agreed on a draft 
treaty that was apparently satisfactory to both sides. Stalin had now ac- 
quired a safety net for determining exactly what Hitler had to offer. 

Throughout the spring and summer, Stalin carefully signaled that he 
was ready to entertain a German proposal. Hitler, however, was wary of 
making the first move lest Stalin use it to extract better terms from Great 
Britain and France. Stalin had the same fear in reverse. He too was reluc- 
tant to make the first move because, if it became public, Great Britain 
might abandon its Eastern commitments and oblige him to face Hitler 
alone. Nor was he in any hurry; unlike Hitler, he faced no deadlines, and 
his nerves were strong. So Stalin waited, raising Hitler’s anxieties. 

On July 26, Hitler blinked. If he were to attack Poland before the 
autumn rains, he needed to know by September 1 at the latest what Stalin 
intended to do. Karl Schnurre, the head of a German team negotiating a 
new trade agreement with the Soviet Union, was instructed to begin 
broaching political subjects. Using mutual hostility toward the capitalist 
West as a bond, he assured his Soviet counterpart that “there was no 
problem between these two countries from the Baltic to the Black Sea 
or in the Far East that could not be solved.” 15 Schnurre offered to have 
these discussions continued at a high-level political meeting with the 
Soviets. 

Showing eagerness rarely speeds up negotiations. No experienced 
statesman settles just because his interlocutor feels a sense of urgency; he 
is far more likely to use such impatience to try to extract even better 
terms. In any case, Stalin was not to be stampeded. Thus, it was not until 
mid-August that Molotov was instructed to receive the German Ambassa- 
dor, von der Schulenburg, with a list of questions to determine precisely 
what Schnurre was offering. Pressure on the Japanese not to threaten 
Siberia? A nonaggression treaty? A pact on the Baltic States? A deal on 
Poland? 

By this time, Hitler was in such a hurry that, although he hated doing 
so, he was prepared to give way on every point. On August 11, he told 
the high commissioner of Danzig: 


345 



Diplomacy 


Everything I undertake is directed against Russia. If the West is too 
stupid and too blind to comprehend that, I will be forced to come 
to an understanding with the Russians, to smash the West, and then 
after its defeat, to turn against the Soviet Union with my assembled 
forces. 16 

It was certainly an accurate statement of Hitler’s priorities: from Great 
Britain, he wanted noninterference in Continental affairs, and from the 
Soviet Union, he wanted Lebensraum, or living space. It was a measure 
of Stalin’s achievement that he was about to reverse Hitler’s priorities, 
however temporarily. 

In responding to Molotov’s questions, von der Schulenburg informed 
him that Hitler was prepared to send his Foreign Minister, Joachim von 
Ribbentrop, to Moscow immediately with full authority to settle all out- 
standing issues. Stalin could not help noticing that Hitler was prepared to 
negotiate at a level Great Britain had consistently evaded, for no British 
minister had seen fit to visit Moscow during all the months of negotiation, 
even though some had ventured as far east as Warsaw. 

Unwilling to show his hand until he knew precisely what was being 
offered, Stalin turned up the pressure on Hitler another notch. Molotov 
was instructed to express appreciation for Ribbentrop’s enthusiasm but 
to say that an agreement in principle was needed before the utility of a 
visit could be determined. Hitler was invited to frame a precise proposal, 
including a secret protocol to deal with specific territorial questions. Even 
the obtuse Ribbentrop must have understood the purpose of Molotov’s 
request. Any leak of the proposal would be a German draft; Stalin’s hands 
would remain clean, and failure of the negotiations could be ascribed to 
a Soviet refusal to go along with German expansionism. 

By now, Hitler’s nervousness had reached a fever pitch. For a decision 
to strike at Poland had to be reached in a matter of days. On August 20, 
he wrote directly to Stalin. The letter itself posed something of a chal- 
lenge for German protocol officers. Since Stalin’s only title was “General 
Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union” and he held no 
governmental position, they could not decide how to address him. Fi- 
nally, the letter was dispatched simply to “M. Stalin, Moscow.” It stated: “I 
am convinced that the substance of the supplementary protocol desired 
by the Soviet Union can be cleared in the shortest possible time if a 
responsible German statesman can come to Moscow himself to negoti- 
ate.” 17 

Stalin had won his gamble on keeping Soviet options open until the last 
second. For Hitler was clearly about to offer him for free what, in any alli- 


346 



Stalin's Bazaar 


ance with Great Britain and France, he could only have gained after a bloody 
war with Germany. On August 21, Stalin replied, expressing his hope “that 
the German-Soviet Nonaggression Pact will mark a decisive turn for the 

better in the political relations between our two countries ” 18 Ribben- 

trop was invited to come to Moscow forty-eight hours later, on August 23. 

Ribbentrop had been in Moscow no more than an hour before he was 
ushered into Stalin’s presence. The Soviet leader showed little interest in 
a nonaggression pact and even less in the professions of friendship which 
Ribbentrop had incorporated into his remarks. The focal point of his 
concern was the secret protocol dividing up Eastern Europe. Ribbentrop 
proposed that Poland be divided into spheres of influence along the 1914 
border, the principal difference being that Warsaw would remain on the 
German side. Whether some semblance of Polish independence would 
be maintained or whether Germany and the Soviet Union would annex 
all their conquests was left open. With respect to the Baltics, Ribben- 
trop proposed that Finland and Estonia fall within the Russian sphere 
(giving Stalin his long-desired buffer zone around Leningrad), that Lithua- 
nia go to Germany, and that Latvia be partitioned. When Stalin demanded 
all of Latvia, Ribbentrop telegraphed Hitler, who gave way — as he would 
with respect to Stalin’s claim to take Bessarabia from Romania. An elated 
Ribbentrop returned to Berlin, where a euphoric Hitler greeted him as 
“a second Bismarck.” 19 A mere three days had transpired between the 
time of Hitler’s initial message to Stalin and the completion of a diplo- 
matic revolution. 

Afterward, there was the usual postmortem about who was responsible 
for this shocking turn of events. Some blamed Great Britain’s grudging 
negotiating style. The historian A. J. P. Taylor has shown that, in the 
exchanges between Great Britain and the Soviet Union, the Soviets, rather 
uncharacteristically, responded to British proposals much more quickly 
than the British did to Soviet messages. From this fact Taylor concluded, 
in my view incorrectly, that the Kremlin was more anxious for an alliance 
than London was. 20 I believe it was much more a case of Stalin’s being 
eager to keep Great Britain in play and not rattle it prematurely — at least 
until he could determine Hitler’s intentions. 

The British Cabinet obviously made a number of grave psychological 
errors. Not only did no minister visit Moscow, but London delayed its 
agreement to joint military planning until early August. Even then, an 
admiral was made the head of the British delegation, though ground 
warfare was the principal, if not the only, subject on Soviet minds. More- 
over, the delegation traveled to the Soviet Union by boat, taking five days 
to reach its destination, which did not exactly denote a sense of urgency. 


347 



Diplomacy 


Finally, however worthy the moral considerations, Great Britain’s reluc- 
tance to guarantee the Baltic States was bound to be interpreted by the 
paranoid leader in Moscow as an invitation to Hitler to attack the Soviet 
Union, bypassing Poland. 

Yet it was not Great Britain’s clumsy diplomatic conduct that had led to 
the Nazi-Soviet Pact. The real problem was that Great Britain could not 
meet Stalin’s terms without abandoning every principle it had stood for 
since the end of the First World War. There was no point in drawing a 
line against the rape of small countries by Germany if that implied having 
to grant the same privilege to the Soviet Union. A more cynical British 
leadership might have drawn the line at the Soviet border instead of 
Poland’s, thereby greatly improving Great Britain’s bargaining position 
with the Soviet Union and giving Stalin a serious incentive to negotiate 
about protecting Poland. To their moral credit, the democracies could 
not bring themselves to consecrate another set of aggressions, not even 
on behalf of their own security. Realpolitik would have dictated an analy- 
sis of the strategic implications of Great Britain’s guarantee to Poland, 
whereas the Versailles international order required that Great Britain’s 
course be sustained by essentially moral and legal considerations. Stalin 
had a strategy but no principles; the democracies defended principle 
without ever developing a strategy. 

Poland could not be defended with the French army inert behind the 
Maginot Line, and the Soviet army waiting inside its own frontiers. In 
1914, the nations of Europe had gone to war because military and political 
planning had lost touch with each other. As the general staffs had polished 
their plans, the political leaders neither understood them nor had any 
political objectives commensurate with the magnitude of the military 
effort being envisaged. 

In 1939, military and political planning again lost touch, this time for 
the exactly opposite reason. The Western powers had an eminently sensi- 
ble and moral political objective — to stop Hitler. But they were never 
able to develop a military strategy to attain that goal. In 1914, strategists 
were too reckless; in 1939, they were too self-effacing. In 1914, the mili- 
tary of every country were spoiling for war; in 1939, they had so many 
misgivings (even in Germany) that they abdicated their judgment to the 
political leaders. In 1914, there had been a strategy but no policy; in 1939, 
there was a policy but no strategy. 

Russia played a decisive role in the outbreak of both wars. In 1914, 
Russia had contributed to the start of the war by rigidly adhering to its 
alliance with Serbia and to an inflexible mobilization schedule; in 1939, 
when Stalin relieved Hitler of the fear of a two-front war, he must have 


348 



Stalin's Bazaar 


known that he was making a general war inevitable. In 1914, Russia had 
gone to war to preserve its honor; in 1939, it encouraged war to share in 
the spoils of Hitler’s conquests. 

Germany, however, conducted itself in exactly the same manner prior 
to the outbreak of both world wars — with impatience and a lack of per- 
spective. In 1914, it had gone to war to break up an alliance which almost 
surely would not have held together in the absence of German bullying; 
in 1939, it was unwilling to wait for its inevitable evolution into the 
decisive nation of Europe. And that would have required the precise 
opposite of Hitler’s strategy — a period of repose to permit post-Munich 
geopolitical realities to sink in. In 1914, the German Emperor’s emotional 
imbalance and lack of a clear concept of the national interest had pre- 
vented him from waiting; in 1939, an ingenious psychotic determined to 
wage war while still at the height of his physical powers swept all rational 
calculations aside. The needlessness of Germany’s decision to go to war 
in both instances has been illustrated by the fact that, despite two major 
defeats and after being deprived of about a third of its pre-World War I 
territory, Germany remains Europe’s most powerful, and probably most 
influential, nation. 

As for the Soviet Union in 1939, it was ill-equipped for the struggle that 
was about to take place. Yet, by the end of World War II, it counted as a 
global superpower. As Richelieu had in the seventeenth century, Stalin in 
the twentieth century took advantage of the fragmentation in Central 
Europe. The ascent of the United States to superpower status was fore- 
ordained by America’s industrial might. The Soviet ascendancy had its 
origin in the ruthless manipulation of Stalin’s bazaar. 


349 




CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

The Nazi- Soviet Pact 


Until 1941, Hitler and Stalin had pursued untraditional goals by using 
traditional means. Stalin waited for the day wiien a communist world 
might be steered from within the Kremlin. Hitler had outlined his mad 
vision of a racially pure empire governed by the German master race in 
his book, Mein Kampf. Two more revolutionary visions could hardly 
have been imagined. Yet the means which Hitler and Stalin employed, 
culminating in their pact of 1939, could have been taken from a treatise 
on eighteenth-century statecraft. On one level, the Nazi-Soviet Pact was a 
repetition of the partitions of Poland effected by Frederick the Great, 
Catherine the Great, and Empress Maria Theresa in 1772. Unlike these 


350 



The Nazi-Soviet Pact 


three monarchs, however, Hitler and Stalin were ideological adversaries. 
For a while, their common national interest in seeking the demise of 
Poland overrode their ideological differences. When their pact finally 
unraveled in 1941, the largest land war in the history of mankind was 
unleashed, in effect by the will of one man. It is no small irony that the 
twentieth century — the age of popular will and of impersonal forces — 
should have been forged by so few individuals, and that its greatest calam- 
ity might have been avoided by the elimination of a single individual. 

As the German army smashed Poland in less than a month, the French 
forces, confronting only under-strength German divisions, watched pas- 
sively from behind the Maginot Line. A period appropriately nicknamed 
the “phony war” followed, during which France’s demoralization became 
complete. For hundreds of years, France had been fighting wars for spe- 
cific political objectives — to keep Central Europe divided or, as in World 
War I, to regain Alsace-Lorraine. Now it was supposed to be fighting on 
behalf of a country which had already been conquered and in the defense 
of which it had not lifted a finger. In effect, France’s dispirited population 
faced another fait accompli and a war which lacked an underlying strat- 
egy. 

For how did Great Britain and France propose to win the war against a 
country which had nearly prevailed against them when Russia and the 
United States were on the side of the Allies? They were acting as if it were 
possible to wait behind the Maginot Line for the British blockade of 
Germany to squeeze Hitler into submission. But why should Germany 
hold still for this slow strangulation? And why should it attack the Maginot 
Line when the road through Belgium lay wide open, this time to be taken 
by the full German army since there was no longer an Eastern front? And 
if defense was indeed as dominant in war as the French general staff 
believed— despite the contrary lesson of the Polish campaign — what 
other fate could await France than a second war of attrition in a genera- 
tion and before it had recovered from the first? 

While France waited, Stalin seized his strategic opportunity. But before 
the secret protocol regarding the division of Eastern Europe could be 
implemented, Stalin wanted it revised. Like an eighteenth-century prince 
disposing of territory without even a tip of the hat to self-determination, 
Stalin proposed a new deal to Germany less than a month after complet- 
ing the Nazi-Soviet Pact: swapping the Polish territory between Warsaw 
and the Curzon Line, which, under the secret protocol, was to go to the 
Soviet Union, for Lithuania, which was to go to Germany. Stalin’s purpose, 
of course, was to create an additional buffer for Leningrad. Nor did he 
seem to feel the need for so much as the pretense of any justification for 


351 



Diplomacy 


his geostrategic maneuvers other than the requirements of Soviet secu- 
rity. Hitler accepted Stalin’s proposal. 

Stalin wasted no time collecting on his end of the secret protocol. With 
the war in Poland still raging, the Soviet Union proposed a military alli- 
ance to the three tiny Baltic States, along with the right to establish mili- 
tary bases on their territory. Denied help from the West, the small 
republics had no alternative other than to take this first step in losing 
their independence. On September 17, 1939, less than three weeks after 
the outbreak of the war, the Red Army occupied the slice of Poland that 
had been designated to the Soviet sphere. 

By November, it was Finland’s turn. Stalin demanded Soviet military 
bases on Finnish soil and the surrender of the Karelian Isthmus, near 
Leningrad. But Finland proved to be made of sterner stuff. It rejected the 
Soviet demand and fought when Stalin went to war. Though Finnish 
forces inflicted severe losses on the Red Army, which was still reeling 
from Stalin’s massive purges, in the end numbers told. After a few months 
of heroic resistance, Finland succumbed to the Soviet Union’s crushing 
superiority. 

In terms of the grand strategy of the Second World War, the Russo- 
Finnish war was a sideshow. Yet it served to demonstrate the degree to 
which France and Great Britain had lost their sense for the strategic 
realities. Blinded by a temporary stalemate imposed by the outnumbered 
Finns, London and Paris seduced themselves with the suicidal speculation 
that the Soviet Union might represent the soft underbelly of the Axis (to 
which, of course, it did not belong). Preparations were made to send 
30,000 troops into Finland through Sweden and Northern Norway. On 
the way, they would cut Germany off from the iron ore in Northern 
Norway and Sweden, which was being shipped to Germany from the 
northern Norwegian port of Narvik. The fact that neither of these coun- 
tries was prepared to grant them transit rights did not dim the enthusiasm 
of the French and British planners. 

The threat of Allied intervention may have helped Finland to obtain a 
better settlement than the original Soviet demands would have suggested 
but, in the end, nothing could keep Stalin from pushing the Soviet de- 
fense line away from the approaches to Leningrad. For historians, the 
puzzle remains as to what possessed Great Britain and France to come 
within a hairsbreadth of fighting both the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany 
simultaneously three months before the collapse of France proved the 
whole scheme was nothing but a pipedream. 

In May 1940, the “ph<pny war” ended. The German army repeated its 
maneuver of 1914 by wheeling through Belgium, the principal difference 


352 



The Nazi-Soviet Pact 


being that the major thrust was now at the center of the front rather than 
on the right wing. Paying the price for a decade and a half of doubts and 
evasions, France collapsed. Though the efficiency of the German military 
machine was by now well established, observers were shocked at the 
speed with which France was routed. In the First World War, German 
armies had spent four years pushing toward Paris in vain; every mile was 
achieved at enormous human expense. In 1940, the German Blitzkrieg 
cut through France; by the end of June, German troops were marching 
along the Champs-Elysdes. Hitler seemed to be master of the Continent. 

But, like other conquerors before him, Hitler did not know how to end 
the war he had so recklessly started. He had three choices: he could try 
to defeat Great Britain; he could make peace with Great Britain; or he 
could seek to conquer the Soviet Union and then, using its vast resources, 
turn back west with all his forces and complete the destruction of Great 
Britain. 

During the summer of 1940, Hitler attempted the first two approaches. 
In a boastful speech on July 19, he hinted that he was prepared to make 
a compromise peace with Great Britain. In effect, he asked it to relinquish 
the prewar German colonies and to renounce interference in affairs on 
the Continent. In return, he would guarantee the British Empire. 1 

Hitler’s proposal was analogous to what imperial Germany had been 
offering Great Britain for two decades prior to World War I — though then 
it had been framed in more conciliatory language and England’s strategic 
situation had been much more favorable. Perhaps, if Hitler had been 
more specific about what a Europe organized by Germany would look 
like, some of the British leaders — such as Lord Halifax, though never 
Churchill — toying with the idea of negotiating with Germany might have 
been tempted. By in effect asking Great Britain to grant Germany com- 
plete freedom of action on the Continent, Hitler evoked the traditional 
British response — one which Sir Edward Grey had made in 1909 in 
reaction to a similar proposal by far more rational German leaders than 
Hitler (and while France was still a major power) when he noted that, if 
Great Britain sacrificed the Continental nations to Germany, it would 
sooner or later be attacked on the British Isles (see chapter 7). Nor would 
Great Britain take seriously a “guarantee” for its Empire. No German 
leader ever grasped the British view that any nation capable of protecting 
the Empire was also capable of conquering it — as Sir Eyre Crowe had 
already pointed out in his famous 1907 Memorandum (see chapter 7). 

Churchill, of course, was far too sophisticated and had studied too 
much history to have any illusion that, at the end of the war, Great Britain 
would still be the premier world power or even in the front rank. Either 


353 



Diplomacy 


Germany or the United States would claim that position. Churchill’s 
intransigence toward Germany in the summer of 1940 can therefore 
be interpreted as a decision in favor of American over German hege- 
mony. American pre-eminence might prove uncomfortable at times, but 
at least its culture and language were familiar and there were no ostensi- 
bly clashing interests. Finally, there was always the prospect of that “spe- 
cial” relationship between Great Britain and America that would have 
been inconceivable with Nazi Germany. By the summer of 1940, Hitler 
had maneuvered himself into the position where he himself had become 
the casus belli. 

Hitler now turned to his second option of seeking to destroy the British 
air force and, if necessary, of invading the British Isles. But he never went 
further than to toy with the idea. Landing operations had not been a part 
of German prewar planning, and the plan was abandoned because of a 
shortage of landing craft and the inability of the Luftwaffe to destroy the 
Royal Air Force. By the end of the summer, Germany again found itself in 
a position not so very dissimilar from the one it had been in during the 
First World War; having achieved major successes, it was unable to trans- 
late them into final victory. 

Hitler, of course, was in an excellent position to go on the strategic 
defensive — Great Britain was not strong enough to challenge the German 
army alone; America would have found it nearly impossible to enter the 
war; and Stalin, however he might play with the idea of intervention, 
would in the end always have found some reason to postpone it. But 
waiting for others to take the initiative was against Hitler’s nature. It was 
therefore inevitable that his mind would turn to an attack on the Soviet 
Union. 

As early as July 1940, Hitler ordered preliminary staff plans for a Soviet 
campaign. He told his generals that, once the Soviet Union was defeated, 
Japan would be able to throw all its armed forces against America, divert- 
ing Washington’s attention to the Pacific. An isolated Great Britain without 
the prospect of American support would be forced to give up the fight: 
“Britain’s hope lies in Russia and the United States,” Hitler noted accu- 
rately. “If the hopes pinned on Russia are disappointed then America too 
will fall by the wayside, because elimination of Russia would tremen- 
dously increase Japan’s power in the Far East. . . . ” 2 Hitler, however, was 
not quite ready to give the order to attack. First he would explore the 
possibility of luring the Soviets into a joint attack on the British Empire 
and of disposing of the British before turning east. 

Stalin realized all too well the difficulty of his position. France’s col- 
lapse wrecked the expectation — which Stalin had shared with all the 
Western military experts — that the war would be the same sort of lengthy 


354 



The Nazi-Soviet Pact 


struggle of attrition that World War I had been. Stalin’s fondest hope, that 
Germany and the Western democracies would exhaust themselves, had 
evaporated. If Great Britain fell as well, the German army would be freed 
for an attack eastward, and would be able to make use of the full re- 
sources of Europe according to the concept Hitler had advertised in Mein 
Kampf. 

Stalin reacted in nearly stereotypic fashion. At no point in his career 
did he react to danger by displaying fear, even when he must have felt it. 
Convinced that an admission of weakness would tempt an adversary to 
raise his terms, he always tried to obscure strategic dilemmas with intran- 
sigence. If Hitler tried to exploit his victory in the West by applying 
pressure against the Soviet Union, Stalin would make the prospect of 
extracting concessions from him as unattractive and painful as possible. 
An excruciatingly careful calculator, he failed, however, to take into ac- 
count Hitler’s neurotic personality and thus excluded the possibility that 
Hitler might respond to a challenge with a two-front war, no matter how 
reckless such a course. 

Stalin opted for a two-pronged strategy. He accelerated harvesting the 
remainder of the booty promised him in the secret protocol. In June 
1940, while Hitler was still occupied with France, Stalin issued an ultima- 
tum to Romania to cede Bessarabia and also demanded northern Buko- 
vina. The latter was not part of the secret agreement, and possession of it 
would place Soviet forces all along the Romanian portion of the Danube 
River. That same month, he incorporated the Baltic States into the Soviet 
Union by forcing them to agree to sham elections in which not quite 20 
percent of the population participated. When the process was completed, 
Stalin had regained all the territory Russia had lost at the end of the First 
World War; and the Allies had paid the last of a series of installments on 
the cost of having excluded both Germany and the Soviet Union from the 
1919 Peace Conference. 

Concurrent with strengthening his strategic position, Stalin continued 
his efforts to placate his ominous neighbor by supplying Hitler’s war 
machine with raw materials. As early as February 1940 — before Ger- 
many’s victory over France — a trade agreement was signed in Stalin’s 
presence committing the Soviet Union to deliver large quantities of raw 
materials to Germany. Germany, in turn, provided the Soviet Union with 
coal and manufactured goods. The Soviet Union meticulously observed 
the provisions of the agreement and generally exceeded them. Indeed, 
literally up to the very moment when the Germans finally attacked, Soviet 
railroad cars were still crossing the border checkpoints with their deliver- 
ies. 

None of Stalin’s moves, however, could alter the geopolitical reality 


355 



Diplomacy 


that Germany had become the dominant power in Central Europe. Hitler 
had made it quite plain that he would not tolerate any Soviet expansion 
beyond the provisions of the secret protocol. In August 1940, Germany 
and Italy forced Romania, which Stalin by this time considered a part of 
the Soviet sphere of influence, to return two-thirds of Transylvania to 
Hungary, a near-ally of the Axis Powers. Determined to protect Romania’s 
oil supplies, Hitler drew the line more explicitly in September by guaran- 
teeing Romania and ordering a motorized division and air forces to Ro- 
mania to back up the guarantee. 

In the same month, tension grew at the other end of Europe. In 
violation of the secret protocol, which had placed Finland in the Soviet 
sphere of influence, Finland agreed to permit German troops to cross its 
territory en route to Northern Norway. Moreover, there were significant 
German arms deliveries, whose only conceivable objective could be to 
strengthen Finland against Soviet pressure. When Molotov asked Berlin 
for more concrete information, he was given evasive replies. Soviet and 
German troops were beginning to jostle each other across the entire 
length of Europe. 

For Stalin, the most ominous new development, however, occurred on 
September 27, 1940, when Germany, Italy, and Japan signed a Tripartite 
Pact obliging each of them to go to war against any additional country 
that joined the British side. To be sure, the Pact specifically excluded the 
relations of each of the signatories with the Soviet Union. This meant that 
Japan undertook no obligation to participate in a German-Soviet war, no 
matter who struck first, but was required to fight America in case it 
entered the war against Germany. Though the Tripartite Pact was ostensi- 
bly aimed at Washington, Stalin had no cause to feel reassured. Whatever 
the legal provisions, he had to expect that the three Pact members would 
at some point turn on him. That he was the odd man out was evident 
from the fact that he had not even been informed about the negotiations 
until the Pact had been concluded. 

By the fall of 1940, tensions were mounting at such a rate that the two 
dictators made what would turn out to be their last diplomatic effort to 
outmaneuver each other. Hitler’s goal was to lure Stalin into a joint assault 
on the British Empire so as to destroy him all the more surely once 
Germany’s rear was secure. Stalin attempted to gain time in the hope that 
Hitler might overreach somewhere along the way, but also in order to 
determine what he might be able to scavenge in the process. Nothing 
came of the efforts to arrange a face-to-face meeting between Hitler and 
Stalin in the wake of the Tripartite Pact. Each leader did his best to avoid 
it by claiming he could not leave his own country, and the logical meeting 


356 



The Nazi -Soviet Pact 


place — Brest-Litovsk, at the frontier — carried too much historical bag- 
gage. 

On October 13, 1940, Ribbentrop wrote a long letter to Stalin giving 
his own interpretation of the course of events since his visit to Moscow 
the year before. It was an unusual breach of protocol for a foreign minis- 
ter to address not his counterpart but a leader who did not even have 
a formal governmental office (Stalin’s sole position remained General 
Secretary of the Communist Party). 

Ribbentrop’s letter compensated in pomposity for its lack of diplomatic 
finesse. He blamed Soviet-German disagreements over Finland and Ro- 
mania on British machinations, without explaining how London might 
have accomplished such a feat. And he insisted that the Tripartite Pact had 
not been directed against the Soviet Union — indeed, the Soviet Union 
would be welcome to join in a division of the spoils between the Euro- 
pean dictators and Japan after the war. Ribbentrop concluded by inviting 
Molotov to pay a return visit to Berlin. On that occasion, Ribbentrop 
averred the possibility that the Soviet Union’s joining the Tripartite Pact 
could be discussed. 3 

Stalin was far too cautious to divide spoils which had not yet been 
conquered, or to enter the front line of a confrontation designed by 
others. Still, he would keep open the option of dividing the booty with 
Hitler in case Great Britain simply collapsed — just as he would do in 
1945, when he joined the war against Japan in its final stage for a heavy 
price. On October 22, Stalin replied to Ribbentrop’s letter with alacrity 
laced with irony. Thanking Ribbentrop for his “instructive analysis of 
recent events,” he refrained from offering his own personal assessment 
of them. Perhaps to show that two could play at stretching protocol, he 
accepted the invitation for Molotov to come to Berlin, unilaterally setting 
a very early date — November 10 — less than three weeks away. 4 

Hitler accepted the proposal immediately, which led to another misun- 
derstanding. Stalin interpreted the speed of Hitler’s acceptance to mean 
that the Soviet relationship remained as crucial to Germany as it had been 
the previous year, hence as proof that his tough tactics were paying off. 
Hitler’s eagerness, however, sprang from his need to get on with his 
planning if he were indeed to attack the Soviet Union in the spring of 
1941. 

The depth of distrust between these two would-be partners was evi- 
dent before the meetings even started. Molotov refused to board a Ger- 
man train sent to the border to escort him to Berlin. The Soviet delegation 
was obviously concerned that the elegance of the German cars might be 
matched by the extensiveness of their bugging devices. (In the end, the 


357 



Diplomacy 


German cars were hitched onto the back of the Soviet train, whose under- 
carriages had been specially constructed so that they could be adjusted 
to the narrower European gauge at the border.) 

Negotiations finally began on November 12. Molotov, who had a faculty 
to irritate far more stable personalities than Hitler, exhibited his abrasive 
tactics with a vengeance before the Nazi leadership. His innate truculence 
was reinforced by his terror of Stalin, whom he feared much more than 
he did Hitler. Molotov’s obsessive concern with his own domestic situa- 
tion was typical of diplomats during the entire Soviet period, though it 
was particularly acute while Stalin was in power. Soviet negotiators always 
seemed much more aware of their domestic constraints than of those in 
the international arena. 

Since foreign ministers were rarely members of the Politburo (Gro- 
myko only became a member in 1973, after sixteen years as Foreign 
Minister), their domestic base was weak and they were always in danger 
of becoming scapegoats for negotiations gone wrong. Moreover, since 
the Soviets assumed that history was ultimately on their side, they were 
more inclined to stonewall than to seek broad solutions. Every negotia- 
tion with Soviet diplomats turned into a test of endurance; no concession 
would ever be forthcoming until the Soviet negotiator had convinced 
himself — and particularly those who read the cables in Moscow — that 
every last ounce of flexibility had been extracted from the other side. On 
the basis of this kind of diplomatic guerrilla warfare, they obtained what- 
ever could be had through persistence and pressure, but they usually 
missed the opportunity for a real breakthrough. Soviet negotiators — with 
Gromyko as the master of the game— became extremely adept at wearing 
down opponents who were saddled with preconceived ideas and impa- 
tient for a settlement. On the other hand, they tended to miss the forest 
for the trees. Thus, in 1971, they lost the opportunity to hold a summit 
meeting with Nixon, which would have delayed his opening to Beijing, 
by spending months haggling over essentially meaningless preconditions 
— all of which the Soviets dropped as soon as Washington had acquired 
a Chinese option. 

It is not possible to imagine two men less likely to communicate than 
Hitler and Molotov. Hitler was not in any event suited to negotiations, 
preferring to overwhelm his interlocutors with extended monologues 
while exhibiting no sign of listening to the response, if indeed he left 
time for a response. In dealing with foreign leaders, Hitler usually con- 
fined himself to passionate statements of general principle. On the few 
occasions he did participate in actual negotiations — as with the Austrian 
Chancellor Kurt von Schuschnigg or Neville Chamberlain — he adopted a 


358 


The Nazi -Soviet Pact 


bullying manner and put forward peremptory demands which he rarely 
modified. Molotov, on the other hand, was less interested in principles 
than in their application. And he had no scope for compromise. 

In November 1940, Molotov found himself in a genuinely difficult posi- 
tion. Stalin was bound to be hard to please, torn as he was between his 
reluctance to contribute to a German victory and his worry that, should 
Germany defeat Great Britain without Soviet assistance, he might miss an 
opportunity to share in Hitler’s conquests. Whatever did happen, Stalin 
was determined never to return to the Versailles arrangement, and at- 
tempted to protect his position by hedging every move. The secret proto- 
col and subsequent events had made his conception of appropriate 
arrangements quite clear to the Germans — perhaps too clear. In this 
sense, Molotov s visit to Berlin was seen as an opportunity for elaboration. 
As for the democracies, Stalin had used the occasion of a visit in July 1940 
by the new British Ambassador, Sir Stafford Cripps, to reject any possibil- 
ity of a return to the Versailles order. When Cripps argued that the fall of 
France had made it necessary for the Soviet Union to take an interest in 
restoring the balance of power, Stalin replied icily: 

The so-called European balance of power had hitherto oppressed not 
only Germany but also the Soviet Union. Therefore the Soviet Union 
would take all measures to prevent the reestablishment of the old 
balance of power in Europe. 5 

In diplomatic language, “all measures” usually embraces the threat of 
war. 

For Molotov, the stakes could hardly have been higher. Since Hitler’s 
record left little doubt that he would not let 1941 go by without launching 
some kind of major campaign, it was probable that, if Stalin did not 
join him in attacking the British Empire, he might well attack the Soviet 
Union. Molotov therefore faced a de facto ultimatum masquerading as 
seduction — though Stalin underestimated how short the deadline actu- 
ally was. 

Ribbentrop opened the conversations by outlining why a German vic- 
tory 7 was inevitable. He urged Molotov to join the Tripartite Pact, unde- 
terred by the fact that this treaty was an elaboration of what had originally 
been the Anti-Comintern Pact. On that basis, argued Ribbentrop, it would 
be possible to “establish spheres of influence between Russia, Germany, 
Italy, and Japan along very broad lines.” 6 According to Ribbentrop, this 
should not lead to conflict, because each of the prospective partners was 
above all interested in expanding southward. Japan would move into 


359 


Diplomacy 


Southeast Asia, Italy into North Africa, and Germany would reclaim its 
former colonies in Africa. After many circumlocutions to emphasize his 
cleverness, Ribbentrop finally identified the prize which had been re- 
served for the Soviet Union: “. . . whether Russia in the long run would 
not also turn to the South for the natural outlet to the open sea that was 
so important for Russia ." 7 

Anyone even vaguely familiar with Hitler’s public statements knew this 
was nonsense. Africa had always been a low Nazi priority. Not only had 
Hitler never shown any particular interest in it, but Molotov probably had 
read enough of Mein Kampf to realize that it was Lebensraum in Russia 
that Hitler was really after. Having silently sat through Ribbentrop’s expo- 
sition, Molotov now inquired matter-of-factly, though somewhat inso- 
lently, to what sea the Soviet Union was supposed to be seeking this 
outlet. Answering with another ponderous circumlocution, Ribbentrop 
finally mentioned the Persian Gulf, as if it were already Germany’s to give 
away: 

The question now was, whether they could not continue in the future 
also to do good business together . . . whether in the long run the most 
advantageous access to the sea for Russia could not be found in the 
direction of the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea, and whether at the 
same time certain other aspirations of Russia in this part of Asia — 
in which Germany was completely disinterested — could not also be 
realized . 8 

Molotov had no interest in so bombastic a proposal. Germany did not yet 
possess what it purported to offer, and the Soviet Union did not need 
Germany to conquer these territories for itself. Expressing his willingness 
in principle to join the Tripartite Pact, Molotov immediately hedged the 
concession with the argument that “precision was necessary in a delinea- 
tion of spheres of influence over a rather long period of time .’’ 9 This, of 
course, could not be completed on just one visit to Berlin and would 
require extended consultations, including a return visit to Moscow by 
Ribbentrop. 

That afternoon, Molotov met with Hitler in the newly completed mar- 
ble Chancellery 7 . Everything had been arranged to awe the proletarian 
minister from Moscow. Molotov was led along a vast corridor on both 
sides of which, every few yards, tall SS men in black uniforms came to 
attention and raised their arms in the Nazi salute. The doors to Hitler’s 
office reached all the way to the high ceiling and were thrown open by 
two particularly tall SS men whose raised arms formed an arch beneath 


360 



The Nazi -Soviet Pact 


which Molotov was ushered into Hitler’s presence. Seated at his desk 
along the far wall of the enormous room, Hitler silently observed his 
visitors for a few moments, then sprang up and, still without saying a 
word, shook hands with each member of the Soviet delegation. As he 
invited them to sit down in the lounge area, some curtains were parted 
and Ribbentrop and a few advisers joined the group. 10 

Having inflicted the Nazi version of majesty on his guests, Hitler laid 
out his idea of the purpose of their meeting. He proposed agreeing on a 
joint long-term strategy because both Germany and the Soviet Union “had 
at their helm men who possessed sufficient authority to commit their 
countries to a development in a definite direction.” 11 What Hitler had in 
mind was setting up a kind of joint Monroe Doctrine with the Soviets for 
the whole of Europe and Africa, and dividing the colonial territories 
between themselves. 

Demonstrating that he had not been in the least intimidated by his 
reception, seemingly drawn from some Viennese operettas vision of 
grandeur, Molotov confined himself to a series of precise questions: What 
was the ultimate purpose of the Tripartite Pact? Of Hitler’s definition of 
his self-proclaimed New Order? Of the Greater Asian Sphere? Of German 
intentions in the Balkans? Was the understanding placing Finland in the 
Soviet sphere of influence still valid? 

No one had ever taken over a conversation with Hitler in this manner, 
or subjected him to a cross-examination. In any event, Hitler was not 
interested in limiting German freedom of action in any area his armies 
were capable of reaching — certainly not in Europe. 

The next day’s meeting with Hitler was prefaced by a spartan lunch and 
did not make any better progress. Characteristically, Hitler started out 
with an extended monologue, during which he explained how he pro- 
posed to divide the world with Stalin: 


After the conquest of England the British Empire would be apportioned 
as a gigantic worldwide estate in bankruptcy. ... In this bankrupt estate 
there would be access for Russia to the ice-free and really open ocean. 
Thus far, a minority of 45 million Englishmen had ruled the 600 million 
inhabitants of the British Empire. He was about to crush this minor- 
ity. .. . 

In these circumstances there arose worldwide perspectives — Rus- 
sia’s participation in the solution of these problems would have to be 
arranged. All the countries that could possibly be interested in the 
bankrupt estate would have to stop all controversies and concern them- 
selves exclusively with apportioning the British Empire. 12 


361 



Diplomacy 


Replying sardonically that he agreed with what he had understood, Molo- 
tov promised to report the remainder to Moscow. Concurring in principle 
with Hitler’s statement that the Soviet Union and Germany had no con- 
flicting interests, he immediately put the proposition to a practical test by 
inquiring what Germany’s reaction would be if the Soviet Union extended 
a guarantee to Bulgaria similar to the one Germany had given to Romania 
(which would in effect block further extension of German influence in 
the Balkans). And what about the Soviet Unions annexing Finland? 
Clearly, self-determination was not a principle of Soviet foreign policy, 
and Stalin would not hesitate to annex non-Russian populations if he 
could do so without German interference. Not only the territorial settle- 
ment but the moral principles of the Versailles settlement were dead. 

The tense atmosphere at the meeting did not ease any when Hitler 
pointed out rather testily that Bulgaria did not seem to have asked for a 
Soviet alliance. And he rejected the annexation of Finland on the ground 
that it went beyond the secret protocol, sidestepping the fact that going 
beyond the protocol had been the whole point of Molotov’s journey to 
Berlin. The meeting was ending on a sour note. As Hitler rose, mumbling 
something about the possibility of a British air raid, Molotov reiterated 
his basic message: “The Soviet Union, as a great power, cannot remain 
aloof from the great issues in Europe and Asia .’’ 13 Without specifying how 
the Soviet Union would reciprocate if Hitler granted its wishes, Molotov 
merely promised that, after he had reported to Stalin, he would convey 
his chief s ideas about an appropriate sphere of influence to Hitler. 

Hitler was so annoyed that he did not attend a dinner hosted by Molo- 
tov at the Soviet Embassy — though most of the other Nazi leaders were 
present. The dinner was interrupted by a British air raid and, since the 
Soviet Embassy had no air-raid shelter, the guests scattered in all direc- 
tions. The Nazi leaders shuttled off in limousines, the Soviet delegation 
to the Bellevue Castle (which currently houses the German president 
when he is in Berlin), while Ribbentrop took Molotov to his private 
air-raid shelter nearby. There, he brandished a German draft of Soviet 
adherence to the Tripartite Pact without seeming to understand that Molo- 
tov had neither the inclination nor the authority to go beyond what he 
had told Hitler. Molotov, on his part, ignored the draft and went on to 
raise the very issues Hitler had avoided, reiterating that the Soviet Union 
could not be excluded from any European question. He then specifically 
listed Yugoslavia, Poland, Greece, Sweden, and Turkey, conspicuously 
avoiding the grand vistas along the Indian Ocean which Ribbentrop and 
Hitler had earlier put before him . 14 

Behind Molotov’s insolent and intransigent style was an attempt to gain 


362 



The Nazi -Soviet Pact 


time for Stalin to resolve a nearly insoluble quandary. Hitler was offering 
him a partnership in the defeat of Great Britain. But it did not take much 
imagination to realize that, afterward, the Soviet Union would stand naked 
before its would-be partners in the Tripartite Pact, all of them former 
associates in the Anti-Comintern Pact. On the other hand, if Great Britain 
were to collapse without Soviet assistance, it might be desirable for the 
Soviet Union to improve its strategic position for the inevitable show- 
down with Hitler. 

In the end, Stalin never did decide which course to pursue. On Novem- 
ber 25, Molotov sent Stalin’s conditions for joining the Tripartite Pact to 
Ribbentrop: Germany would have to withdraw its troops from Finland 
and give the Soviet Union a free hand in that country; Bulgaria would 
need to join a military alliance with the Soviet Union and permit Soviet 
bases on its territory; Turkey would be required to accept Soviet bases 
on its territory, including the Dardanelles. Germany would stand aside if 
the Soviet Union pursued its strategic objectives in the Balkans and the 
Dardanelles by force. As an elaboration of Hitler’s own offer that the area 
south of Batum and Baku be recognized as a Soviet sphere of interest, 
Stalin now defined the sphere to include Iran and the Persian Gulf. As for 
Japan, it would have to abandon any claim to mineral rights on Sakhalin 
Island. 15 Stalin had to know that these conditions would never be ac- 
cepted since they blocked any further German expansion toward the east, 
and since he had offered no commensurable Soviet reciprocal act. 

Stalin’s reply to Hitler therefore primarily served to signal what he 
considered to be the Soviet sphere of interest, and as a warning that he 
would resist its impairment, at least diplomatically. Over the course of 
the next decade, employing the tactics of the tsars, Stalin proceeded to 
establish that sphere by agreement whenever possible, by force when 
necessary. He pursued the objectives outlined in the November 25 mem- 
orandum, first in concert with Hitler, next on the side of the democracies 
against Hitler, and finally through confrontation with the democracies. 
Then, toward the very' end of his life, Stalin seemed on the verge of 
exploring a grand bargain with the democracies to safeguard what he 
never ceased to treat as the Soviet sphere of influence (see chapter 20). 

For Hitler, the die was already cast. As early as the day of Molotov’s 
arrival in Berlin, Hitler had ordered all preparations for an attack on the 
Soviet Union to continue, with the final decision to be delayed until an 
operational plan had been approved. 16 In Hitler’s mind, the only decision 
had always been whether to attack the Soviet Union before or after he 
had defeated Great Britain. And Molotov’s visit settled that issue. On 
November 14, the day Molotov left Berlin, Hitler ordered the staff plans 


363 



Diplomacy 


of the summer to be turned into an operational concept for an attack on 
the Soviet Union by the summer of 1941. When he received Stalin’s 
proposal of November 25, he ordered that no reply be returned. Nor did 
Stalin ever ask for one. German military preparations for a war on Russia 
now moved into high gear. 

There has been considerable debate about whether Stalin ever grasped 
the impact of his tactics on a personality like Hitler. In all likelihood, he 
underestimated the deadly impatience of his adversary. For he seems to 
have assumed that Hitler was, like himself, a cool and careful calculator 
who would not willingly launch his armies into the vast spaces of Russia 
before he had concluded the war in the west. In this assumption, Stalin 
was wrong. Hitler believed that willpower could overcome all obstacles. 
His typical response to resistance was to turn it into a personal confronta- 
tion. Hitler could never wait for conditions to mature fully, if only because 
the act of waiting implied that circumstances might transcend his will. 

Stalin not only was more patient but, as a communist, had more respect 
for historical forces. In his nearly thirty years of rule, he never staked 
everything on one throw of the dice and, mistakenly, believed that Hitler 
would not do so either. In the meantime, Stalin was morbidly concerned 
that rash Soviet deployments might trigger a German pre-emptive attack. 
And he misconstrued Hitler’s eagerness to enlist him in the Tripartite Pact 
as proof that the Nazis were planning to devote 1941 to further attempts 
to bring down Great Britain. Apparently, Stalin believed that the following 
year, 1942, was to be the year of decision for a war with Germany. His 
biographer Dmitri Volkogonov told me that Stalin was keeping open the 
option of a pre-emptive war against Germany in that year, which may 
explain why Soviet armies were deployed so far forward in 1941. Ex- 
pecting Hitler to state major demands before attacking, Stalin probably 
would have gone quite a distance to meet these demands — at least in 
1941. 

All such calculations failed because their basic assumption was that 
Hitler engaged in rational calculations; however, Hitler did not consider 
himself bound by a normal calculation of risks. Nary a year of Hitler’s rule 
had gone by without his committing some action which his entourage had 
warned him was too dangerous: rearmament in 1934-35; reoccupying 
the Rhineland in 1936; occupying Austria and Czechoslovakia in 1938; 
attacking Poland in 1939; and the campaign against France in 1940. Nor 
was it Hitler’s intention to let 1941 turn into an exception. Given his 
personality, he could only have been bought off if the Soviet Union had 
decided to join the Tripartite Pact with minimum conditions and had 
participated in a military' operation against Great Britain in the Middle 


364 



The Nazi-Soviet Pact 


East. Then, with Great Britain defeated and the Soviet Union isolated, 
Hitler would surely have gone on to fulfill his lifelong obsession for 
conquests in the east. 

No amount of clever maneuvering on the part of Stalin could, in the 
end, prevent his country’s ending up in much the same position as Poland 
had the year before. The Polish government could only have avoided a 
German attack in 1939 by agreeing to yield the Polish Corridor and 
Danzig, and then by joining a Nazi crusade against the Soviet Union — at 
the end of all of which Poland would still have been at Hitler’s mercy. 
Now, a year later, it seemed that the Soviet Union could only buy a respite 
from German aggression by submitting to Nazi proposals (at the price of 
total isolation and by entering a risky war against Great Britain). In the 
end, however, it would still face an attack from Germany. 

Steely-nerved, Stalin maintained his two-track policy of cooperating 
with Germany by supplying war materials while opposing it geopoliti- 
cally, as if no danger existed at all. Though he was not willing to join the 
Tripartite Pact, he did grant Japan the sole benefit which Soviet adherence 
to the Pact would have brought it by freeing Japan’s rear for adventures 
in Asia. 

Though obviously unaware of Hitler’s briefing to his generals that an 
attack on the Soviet Union would enable Japan to challenge the United 
States overtly, Stalin reached the same conclusion independently and 
set out to remove that incentive. On April 13, 1941, he concluded a 
nonaggression treaty with Japan in Moscow, following essentially the 
same tactics in the face of mounting Asian tensions that he had adopted 
toward the Polish crisis eighteen months earlier. In each case, he re- 
moved the aggressor’s risk of a two-front war, and he managed to deflect 
war from Soviet territory by encouraging what he considered a capitalist 
civil war elsewhere. The Hitler-Stalin Pact had gained him a two-year 
respite, and the nonaggression treaty with Japan enabled him six months 
later to throw his Far Eastern army into the battle for Moscow, which 
decided the outcome of the war in his favor. 

After concluding the nonaggression treaty, Stalin, in an unprecedented 
gesture, saw the Japanese Foreign Minister, Yosuke Matsuoka, off at the 
train station. Symbolic of the importance Stalin attached to the treaty, it 
also provided him with the occasion — in the presence of the entire diplo- 
matic corps — to invite negotiations with Germany while flaunting his 
increased bargaining power. “The European problem can be solved in a 
natural way if Japan and the Soviets cooperate,” said Stalin to the Foreign 
Minister loudly enough for everyone to hear — probably to imply that, 
with his eastern border secure, his bargaining position in Europe had 


365 



Diplomacy 


improved, but perhaps also that Germany did not need to go to war with 
the Soviet Union to free Japan’s rear for war with the United States. 

“Not only the European problem,” replied the Japanese Foreign Minis- 
ter. “The whole world can be settled!” affirmed Stalin — as long as others 
do the fighting, he must have thought, and the Soviet Union receives 
compensation for their successes. 

As a way of conveying his message to Berlin, Stalin then walked over 
to German Ambassador von der Schulenburg, put his arm around him, 
and announced, “We must remain friends and you must now do every- 
thing to that end.” To make sure he had used every channel, including 
the military, to convey his message, Stalin next walked over to the acting 
German military 7 attache and said loudly, “We will stay friends with you, 
whatever happens.” 17 

Stalin had every reason to be concerned about German attitudes. As 
Molotov had hinted in Berlin, he had been pressing Bulgaria to accept a 
Soviet guarantee. Stalin had also negotiated a friendship and nonaggres- 
sion treaty with Yugoslavia in April 1941, at the precise moment Germany 
was seeking transit rights through Yugoslavia to attack Greece — a course 
of conduct certain to encourage Yugoslav resistance to German pressures. 
As it turned out, the Soviet treaty with Yugoslavia was signed only hours 
before the German army crossed the Yugoslav frontier. 

Stalin’s principal weakness as a statesman was his tendency to ascribe 
to his adversaries the same capacity for cold calculation of which he was 
so proud in himself. This caused Stalin to underestimate the impact of his 
own intransigence and to overestimate the scope available in his, how- 
ever rare, efforts at conciliation. This attitude was to blight his relations 
with the democracies after the war. In 1941, he was clearly convinced up 
until the time the Germans crossed the Soviet border that he might at the 
last minute stave off the assault by generating a negotiation — during 
which all the indications are that he was prepared to make vast conces- 
sions. 

Stalin certainly did not fail to deflect an attack from Germany for lack 
of trying. On May 6, 1941, the Soviet people were informed that Stalin had 
taken over the position of Prime Minister from Molotov, who remained as 
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs. It was the first time 
that Stalin emerged from the recesses of the Communist Party to assume 
visible responsibility for the day-to-day conduct of affairs. 

Only circumstances of extreme peril could have propelled Stalin to 
abandon the aura of mysterious menace that was his preferred method 
of government. Andrei Vyshinsky, then Deputy Foreign Minister, told the 
Ambassador of Vichy France that Stalin’s emergence in public office 


366 



The Nazi-Soviet Pact 


marked “the greatest historical event in the Soviet Union since its incep- 
tion.” 18 Von der Schulenburg thought he had divined Stalins purpose. 
“In my opinion,” he told Ribbentrop, “it may be assumed with certainty 
that Stalin has set himself a foreign policy goal of overwhelming impor- 
tance for the Soviet Union, which he hopes to attain by his personal 
efforts. I firmly believe that, in an international situation which he consid- 
ers serious, Stalin has set himself the goal of preserving the Soviet Union 
from a conflict with Germany.” 19 

The next few weeks demonstrated the accuracy of the German Ambas- 
sador’s prediction. As a way of sending a signal of reassurance to Ger- 
many, TASS, on May 8, denied that there were any unusual Soviet troop 
concentrations along the western borders. Over the following weeks, 
Stalin broke diplomatic relations with every European government-in- 
exile located in London — with the wounding explanation that their affairs 
should henceforth be dealt with by the German Embassy. Stalin simulta- 
neously recognized the puppet governments Germany had set up in 
some of the occupied territories. In sum, Stalin went out of his way to 
assure Germany that he recognized all its existing conquests. 

To remove any possible pretext for aggression, Stalin would not permit 
forward Soviet military units to be placed on heightened alert. And he 
ignored British and American warnings of an imminent German attack — 
in part because he suspected the Anglo-Saxons of trying to embroil him in 
a fight with Germany. Though Stalin forbade firing on the ever-mounting 
German reconnaissance overflights, well back from the front he did per- 
mit civil-defense exercises and the calling up of reserves. Obviously, 
Stalin had decided that his best chance for any last-minute deal was to 
reassure the Germans of his intentions, especially since, of the counter- 
measures available, none was really likely to make a decisive difference. 

On June 13, nine days before the Germans attacked, TASS published 
another official statement denying widespread rumors of imminent war. 
The Soviet Union, the statement read, planned to observe all its existing 
agreements with Germany. The release also hinted broadly at the possi- 
bility of new negotiations leading to improved arrangements on all dis- 
puted issues. That Stalin had indeed been prepared to make major 
concessions could be seen from Molotov’s reaction when, on June 22, 
von der Schulenburg brought him the German declaration of war. The 
Soviet Union, Molotov remonstrated plaintively, had been prepared to 
remove all its troops from the frontier as a reassurance to Germany. All 
other demands were negotiable. Molotov said, being uncharacteristically 
defensive, “Surely we have not deserved that.” 20 

Apparently Stalin was so shocked by Germany’s declaration of war that 


367 



Diplomacy 


he fell into something of a depression for a period of about ten days. On 
July 3, however, he resumed command, delivering a major radio address. 
Unlike Hitler, Stalin was not a born orator. He rarely spoke in public, and 
when he did, he was extremely pedantic. In this address too he relied on 
a dry recitation of the monumental task that lay before the Russian peo- 
ples. Yet his very matter-of-factness conveyed a certain resolution and the 
sense that the job, however huge, was manageable. 

“History shows,” said Stalin, “that there are no invincible armies, and 
never have been.” Issuing orders for the destruction of all machinery and 
rolling stock, and for the formation of guerrilla forces behind German 
lines, Stalin read off a sheaf of figures as if he were an accountant. His 
sole bow to rhetoric had been at the beginning of the speech. Never 
before had Stalin appealed to his people on a personal level — nor would 
he ever again; “Comrades, citizens, brothers and sisters, fighting men of 
our army and navy. I am speaking to you, my friends!” 21 

Hitler finally had the war he had always wanted. And he had sealed his 
doom, which, it is possible, he had also always wanted. German leaders, 
now fighting on two fronts, had overreached for the second time in a 
generation. Some 70 million Germans were engaged in combat against 
some 700 million adversaries once Hitler had brought America into the 
war in December 1941. Apparently even Hitler was awestruck at the task 
he had set before himself. Just hours before the attack, he told his staff: “I 
feel as if I am pushing open the door to a dark room, never seen before, 
without knowing what lies behind the door.” 22 

Stalin had gambled on Hitler’s rationality, and he had lost; Hitler had 
gambled that Stalin would quickly collapse, and he too had lost. But 
whereas Stalin’s error was retrievable, Hitler’s was not. 


368 




CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

America Re-enters the Arena: 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


For contemporary political leaders governing by public opinion polls, 
Roosevelt’s role in moving his isolationist people toward participation in 
the war serves as an object lesson on the scope of leadership in a democ- 
racy. Sooner or later, the threat to the European balance of power would 
have forced the United States to intervene in order to stop Germany’s 


369 


Diplomacy 


drive for world domination. The sheer, and growing, strength of America 
was bound to propel it eventually into the center of the international 
arena. That this happened with such speed and so decisively was the 
achievement of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. 

All great leaders walk alone. Their singularity springs from their ability 
to discern challenges that are not yet apparent to their contemporaries. 
Roosevelt took an isolationist people into a war between countries whose 
conflicts had only a few years earlier been widely considered inconsistent 
with American values and irrelevant to American security. After 1940, 
Roosevelt convinced the Congress, which had overwhelmingly passed a 
series of Neutrality Acts just a few years before, to authorize ever-increas- 
ing American assistance to Great Britain, stopping just short of outright 
belligerency and occasionally even crossing that line. Finally, Japans at- 
tack on Pearl Harbor removed America’s last hesitations. Roosevelt was 
able to persuade a society which had for two centuries treasured its 
invulnerability of the dire perils of an Axis victory. And he saw to it that, 
this time, America’s involvement would mark a first step toward perma- 
nent international engagement. During the war, his leadership held the 
alliance together and shaped the multilateral institutions which continue 
to serve the international community to this day. 

No president, with the possible exception of Abraham Lincoln, has 
made a more decisive difference in American history. Roosevelt took the 
oath of office at a time of national uncertainty, when America’s faith in 
the New World’s infinite capacity for progress had been severely shaken 
by the Great Depression. All around him, democracies seemed to be 
faltering and antidemocratic governments on both the Left and the Right 
were gaining ground. 

After Roosevelt had restored hope at home, destiny imposed on him 
the obligation of defending democracy around the world. No one has 
described this aspect of Roosevelt’s contribution better than Isaiah Berlin: 

[Roosevelt] looked upon the future with a calm eye, as if to say ‘Let it 
come, whatever it may be, it will all be grist to our great mill. We shall 
turn it all to benefit.’ ... In a despondent world which appeared divided 
between wicked and fatally efficient fanatics marching to destroy, and 
bewildered populations on the run, unenthusiastic martyrs in a cause 
they could not define, he believed in his own ability, so long as he was 
at the controls, to stem this terrible tide. He had all the character and 
energy and skill of the dictators, and he was on our side. 1 

Roosevelt had already served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy in Wilson’s 
Administration, and had been the Democrats’ vice-presidential candidate 


370 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


in thel920 election. Many leaders, among them de Gaulle, Churchill, and 
Adenauer, have been impelled to come to terms with the loneliness 
inherent in the journey toward greatness by a period of withdrawal from 
public life. Roosevelt’s was imposed on him when he was struck down by 
polio in 1921. In an extraordinary demonstration of willpower, he over- 
came his disability and learned to stand with the aid of braces and even 
to walk a few steps, which enabled him to appear before the public as if 
he were not paralyzed at all. Until his report to the Congress on Yalta in 
1945, Roosevelt stood whenever he delivered a major speech. Because 
the media cooperated with Roosevelt’s attempt to play his role with dig- 
nity, the vast majority of Americans never realized the extent of Roose- 
velt’s handicap or had its perceptions of him tinged by pity. 

Roosevelt, an ebullient leader who used charm to maintain his aloof- 
ness, was an ambiguous combination of political manipulator and vision- 
ary. He governed more often by instinct than by analysis, and evoked 
strongly contrasting emotions. 2 As has been summarized by Isaiah Berlin, 
Roosevelt had serious shortcomings of character, which included unscru- 
pulousness, ruthlessness, and cynicism. Yet Berlin concluded that, in the 
end, these were more than dramatically outweighed by Roosevelt’s posi- 
tive traits: 

What attracted his followers were countervailing qualities of a rare 
and inspiring order: he was large-hearted and possessed wide political 
horizons, imaginative sweep, understanding of the time in which he 
lived and of the direction of the great new forces at work in the twenti- 
eth century — 3 

This was the president who propelled America into a leadership role 
internationally, an environment where questions of war or peace, prog- 
ress or stagnation all around the world came to depend on his vision and 
commitment. 

America’s journey from involvement in the First World War to active 
participation in the Second proved to be a long one — interrupted as it 
was by the nation’s about-face to isolationism. The depth of America’s 
revulsion toward international affairs illustrates the magnitude of Roose- 
velt’s achievement. A brief sketch of the historical backdrop against which 
Roosevelt conducted his policies is therefore necessary. 

In the 1920s, America’s mood was ambivalent, oscillating between a 
willingness to assert principles of universal applicability and a need to 
justify them on behalf of an isolationist foreign policy. Americans took to 
reciting the traditional themes of their foreign policy with even greater 


371 



Diplomacy 


emphasis: the uniqueness of America’s mission as the exemplar of liberty, 
the moral superiority of democratic foreign policy, the seamless relation- 
ship between personal and international morality, the importance of 
open diplomacy, and the replacement of the balance of power by interna- 
tional consensus as expressed in the League of Nations. 

All of these presumably universal principles were enlisted on behalf of 
American isolationism. Americans were still incapable of believing that 
anything outside the Western Hemisphere could possibly affect their se- 
curity. The America of the 1920s and 1930s rejected even its own doctrine 
of collective security lest it lead to involvement in the quarrels of distant, 
bellicose societies. The provisions of the Treaty of Versailles were inter- 
preted as vindictive, and reparations as self-defeating. When the French 
occupied the Ruhr, America used the occasion to withdraw its remaining 
occupying forces from the Rhineland. That Wilsonian exceptionalism had 
established criteria no international order could fulfill, made disillusion- 
ment a part of its very essence. 

Disillusionment with the results of the war erased to a considerable 
extent the distinctions between the internationalists and the isolationists. 
Not even the most liberal internationalists any longer discerned an Ameri- 
can interest in sustaining a flawed postwar settlement. No significant 
group had a good word to say about the balance of power. What passed 
for internationalism was being identified with membership in the League 
of Nations rather than with day-to-day participation in international diplo- 
macy. And even the most dedicated internationalists insisted that the 
Monroe Doctrine superseded the League of Nations, and recoiled before 
the idea of America’s joining League enforcement measures, even eco- 
nomic ones. 

The isolationists carried these attitudes toward their ultimate conclu- 
sion. They attacked the League of Nations in principle, on the ground that 
it jeopardized the twin pillars of historic American foreign policy — the 
Monroe Doctrine and isolationism. The League was believed to be incom- 
patible with the Monroe Doctrine because collective security entitled, 
indeed required, the League to involve itself in disputes within the West- 
ern Hemisphere. And was inconsistent with isolationism because the 
League obliged America to involve itself in disputes outside the Western 
Hemisphere. 

The isolationists had a point. If the entire Western Hemisphere were 
somehow excluded from the operation of collective security, what was to 
keep the other nations of the world from organizing regional groupings 
of their own and excluding them from the operations of the League? In 
that case, the League of Nations would have led to a restoration of a 


372 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


balance-of-power system, albeit on a regional basis. In practice, the inter- 
nationalists and the isolationists converged on a bipartisan foreign policy. 
Both rejected foreign intervention within the Western Hemisphere and 
any participation in League enforcement machinery outside of it. They 
supported disarmament conferences because there was a clear consensus 
that arms caused war and that the reduction of arms contributed to peace. 
They favored internationally endorsed general principles of peaceful set- 
tlement, such as the Kellogg-Briand Pact, as long as these agreements did 
not imply enforcement. Finally, the United States was always helpful on 
technical, usually financial, issues with no immediate political conse- 
quence, such as working out agreed reparations schedules. 

The gap in American thinking between approving a principle and par- 
ticipating in its enforcement became dramatically apparent after the 
1921-22 Washington Naval Conference. The Conference was important 
in two respects. It provided for ceilings in naval armaments for the United 
States, Great Britain, and Japan, granting to the United States a navy equal 
in size to that of Great Britain, and to Japan a navy three-fifths the size of 
the United States. This provision reaffirmed America’s new role as the 
dominant power in the Pacific alongside Japan. Great Britain’s role in that 
theater was henceforth secondary. Most important, a second, so-called 
Four-Power Treaty among Japan, the United States, Great Britain, and 
France providing for the peaceful settlement of disputes was to replace 
the old Anglo-Japanese Alliance of 1902, and to usher in an era of coopera- 
tion in the Pacific. But if one of the signatories of the Four-Power Treaty 
disregarded its provisions, would the others take action against it? “The 
four-power treaty contains no war commitment. . . . There is no commit- 
ment to armed force, no alliance, no written or moral obligation to join 
in defense . . . President Harding explained to a skeptical American Sen- 
ate. 4 

Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes reinforced the President s 
words by putting all of the signatories to the pact on notice that America 
would under no circumstances participate in enforcement measures. But 
the Senate was still not satisfied. In ratifying the Four-Power Treaty, the 
Senate added reservations stipulating that this would not commit the 
United States to using armed force in repelling aggression. 5 In other 
words, the agreement stood on its own merit; failure to observe it would 
involve no consequence. America would decide each case as it arose, just 
as if there were no agreement. 

In terms of the way diplomacy had been routinely practiced for centu- 
ries, it was indeed an extraordinary proposition that a solemn treaty 
conferred no right of enforcement, and that enforcement had to be sepa- 


373 



Diplomacy 


rately negotiated with the Congress on a case-by-case basis. It was a 
foretaste of the debates between the Nixon Administration and the Con- 
gress after the Vietnam Peace agreement of January 1973, wherein the 
Congress argued that an agreement for which America had fought 
through three administrations of both parties did not confer any right of 
enforcement. According to that theory, agreements with America would 
reflect Washington’s mood of the moment; whatever consequences grew 
out of them would likewise depend on Washington’s mood at some other 
moment — an attitude not very likely to engender confidence in America’s 
commitments. 

The Senate’s reserve had not inhibited President Harding’s enthusiasm 
for the Four-Power Treaty. At the signing ceremony, he praised it because 
it protected the Philippines and marked “the beginning of a new and 
better epoch in human progress. ” How was it possible for a treaty without 
enforcement provisions to protect a prize as rich as the Philippines? 
Despite his position on the opposite end of the political spectrum, Har- 
ding invoked the standard Wilsonian liturgy. The world, he said, would 
punish violators by proclaiming “the odiousness of perfidy or infamy.” 6 
Harding, however, failed to explain how world public opinion was to be 
determined, let alone marshaled, and for what cause, so long as America 
refused to join the League of Nations. 

The Kellogg-Briand Pact, the impact of which on Europe was discussed 
in chapter 11, turned into another example of America’s tendency to treat 
principles as self-implementing. Although American leaders enthusiasti- 
cally proclaimed the historic nature of the treaty because sixty-two nations 
had renounced war as an instrument of national policy, they adamantly 
refused to endorse any machinery for applying it, much less for enforcing 
it. President Calvin Coolidge, waxing effusive before the Congress in 
December 1928, asserted: “Observance of this Covenant ... promises 
more for the peace of the world than any other agreement ever negoti- 
ated among the nations.” 7 

Yet how was this utopia to be achieved? Coolidge’s passionate defense 
of the Kellogg-Briand Pact spurred internationalists and supporters of the 
League to argue, quite reasonably, that, war having been outlawed, the 
concept of neutrality had lost all meaning. In their view, since the League 
had been designed to identify aggressors, the international community 
was obliged to punish them appropriately. “Does anyone believe,” asked 
one of the proponents of this view, “that the aggressive designs of Musso- 
lini could be checked merely by the good faith of the Italian people and 
the power of public opinion?” 8 

The prescience of this question did not enhance its acceptability. Even 


374 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


while the treaty bearing his name was still in the process of being de- 
bated, Secretary of State Kellogg, in an address before the Council on 
Foreign Relations, stressed that force would never be used to elicit com- 
pliance. Reliance on force, he argued, would turn what had been intended 
as a long stride toward peace into precisely the sort of military alliance 
that was so in need of being abolished. Nor should the Pact include a 
definition of aggression, since any definition would omit something and 
thereby weaken the nobility of the Pacts wording . 9 For Kellogg, the word 
was not only the beginning, it was the end: 

A nation claiming to act in self-defense must justify itself before the bar 
of world opinion as well as before the signatories of the treaty. For that 
reason I declined to place in the treaty a definition of aggressor or of 
self-defense because I believed that no comprehensive legalistic defini- 
tion could be framed in advance. . . . This would make it more difficult 
rather than less difficult for an aggressor nation to prove its inno- 
cence . 10 

The Senate was no more impressed by Kellogg’s explanations than it had 
been six years earlier by Harding’s exegesis of why the Four- Power Treaty 
did not mean what it said. Now it added three “understandings” of its 
own: in the Senate’s view, the treaty did not limit either the right of self- 
defense or of the Monroe Doctrine, nor did it create any obligation to 
assist victims of aggression — which meant that every foreseeable contin- 
gency had been exempted from its provisions. The Senate endorsed the 
Kellogg-Briand Pact as a statement of principle while insisting that the 
treaty had no practical implications, raising the question whether involv- 
ing America even in an enunciation of principle was worth the reserva- 
tions it would inevitably elicit. 

If the United States rejected alliances and was casting doubts on the 
efficacy of the League, how was the Versailles system to be safeguarded? 
Kellogg’s answer proved far less original than his critique, being that old 
standby, the force of public opinion: 

... if by this treaty all the nations solemnly pronounce against war as an 
institution for settling international disputes, the world will have taken 
a forward step, created a public opinion, marshaled the great moral 
forces of the world for its observance, and entered into a sacred obliga- 
tion which will make it far more difficult to plunge the world into 
another great conflict . 11 

Four years later, Kellogg’s successor, Henry Stimson, as distinguished and 
sophisticated a public servant as America had produced in the entire 


375 



Diplomacy 


interwar period, was not able to advance a better remedy against aggres- 
sion than the Kellogg-Briand Pact — backed, of course, by the strength of 
public opinion: 

The Kellogg-Briand Pact provides for no sanctions of force Instead 

it rests upon the sanction of public opinion which can be made one of 

the most potent sanctions of the world Those critics who scoff at it 

have not accurately appraised the evolution in world opinion since the 
Great War . 12 

To a distant island power — as the United States stood vis-a-vis Europe and 
Asia — the disputes of Europe necessarily appeared abstruse and often 
irrelevant. Since America possessed a wide margin of safety to insulate it 
from challenges which threatened European countries without affecting 
American security, the European countries were in effect functioning as 
Americas safety valves. A similar line of reasoning had led to Great Brit- 
ain’s aloofness from day-to-day European politics during the period of its 
“splendid isolation.” 

There was, however, a fundamental difference between Great Britain’s 
“splendid isolation” of the nineteenth century and America’s isolationism 
of the twentieth century. Great Britain, too, had sought to steer clear 
of Europe’s daily squabbles. It recognized, however, that its own safety 
depended on the balance of power, and it was quite prepared to defend 
that balance by using the traditional methods of European diplomacy. In 
contrast, America never accepted the importance of either the balance of 
power or of the European style of diplomacy. Believing itself blessed by 
a unique and ultimately superior dispensation, America simply did not 
engage itself, and if it did, then only for general causes and in accordance 
with its own particular style of diplomacy — which was vastly more public, 
more juridical, and ideological than Europe’s. 

The interaction of the European and American styles of diplomacy 
during the interwar period therefore tended to combine the worst of 
both approaches. Feeling threatened, the European countries, especially 
France and the new nations of Eastern Europe, did not accept Americas 
legacy of collective security and international arbitration, or its juridical 
definitions of war and peace. The nations which had become converts to 
the American agenda, principally Great Britain, had no experience in 
conducting policy on that basis. Yet all of these countries were very well 
aware that Germany could never have been defeated without America’s 
help. Since the end of the war, the balance of power had become even 
less favorable toward the wartime Allies. In any new war with Germany, 
American help would be needed more urgently, and probably sooner 


376 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


than it had been the last time, especially since the Soviet Union was no 
longer a player. 

The practical result of this mixture of fear and hope was that European 
diplomacy continued to drift further away from its traditional moorings 
and toward greater emotional dependence on America, producing a dou- 
ble veto: France would not act without Great Britain, and Great Britain 
would not act contrary to views strongly held in Washington, never mind 
that American leaders never tired of volubly insisting that they would in 
no circumstance risk war on behalf of European issues. 

America’s consistent refusal throughout the 1920s to commit itself to 
safeguarding the Versailles system proved to be terrible psychological 
preparation for the 1930s, when international tensions began to erupt. A 
foretaste of what lay ahead came in 1931, when Japan invaded Manchuria, 
separated it from China, and turned it into a satellite state. The United 
States condemned Japan’s actions but refused to participate in collective 
enforcement. In censuring Japan, America introduced a sanction of its 
own, which at the time seemed like an evasion but which, a decade later, 
would, in Roosevelt’s hands, turn into a weapon for forcing a showdown 
with Japan. This sanction was the policy of refusing to recognize territorial 
changes brought about by force. Originated by Stimson in 1932, it was 
invoked by Roosevelt in the fall of 1941 to demand that Japan withdraw 
from Manchuria and all of its other conquests. 

On January 30, 1933, the world crisis began in earnest with Hitler’s 
accession to the position of German Chancellor. Destiny had decreed that 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who did as much as any other individual to 
lay Hitler low, would take his oath of office a little more than four weeks 
later. Still, nothing in Roosevelt’s first term foreshadowed such an out* 
come. Roosevelt rarely deviated from the standard rhetoric of the in- 
terwar period and repeated the isolationist themes handed down by his 
predecessors. In a speech before the Woodrow Wilson Foundation on 
December 28, 1933, Roosevelt addressed the imminent end of the agreed 
term of the Naval Treaties of the 1920s. He proposed to extend these 
accords by calling for the abolition of all offensive weapons and — hark- 
ening back to Kellogg — by a commitment that no nation permit its mili- 
tary forces to enter the territory of another. 

The subject was as familiar as Roosevelt’s solution to possible violations 
of what he was proposing. Once again, the censure of public opinion was 
invoked as the only available remedy: 

... no such general agreement for the elimination of aggression or the 

elimination of the weapons of offensive warfare would be of any value 


377 



Diplomacy 


in this world unless every Nation, without exception, would enter into 

such an agreement by solemn obligation [T]hen, my friends, it 

would be a comparatively easy matter to separate the sheep from the 
goats — It is but an extension of the challenge of Woodrow Wilson 
for us to propose in this newer generation that from now on war by 
governments shall be changed to peace by peoples . 13 


There was no provision for what might happen to the goats once they 
were separated from the sheep. 

Roosevelt’s proposal was moot by the time it was put forward, since 
Germany had left the Disarmament Conference two months earlier and 
refused to return. In any event, banning offensive weapons was not on 
Hitlers agenda. Nor, as it turned out, did Hitler suffer global opprobrium 
for having opted for rearmament. 

Roosevelt’s first term coincided with the heyday of revisionism about 
the First World War. In 1935, a special Senate Committee under North 
Dakotas Senator Gerald Nye published a 1400-page report blaming 
America’s entry into the war on armaments manufacturers. Soon thereaf- 
ter, Walter Millis’ best-selling book, The Road to War ; popularized the 
thesis for a mass audience. 14 Under the impact of this school of thought, 
America’s participation in the war came to be explained by malfeasance, 
conspiracy, and betrayal rather than by fundamental or permanent inter- 
ests. 

To prevent America from once again being lured into war, the Con- 
gress passed three so-called Neutrality Acts between 1935 and 1937. 
Prompted by the Nye Report, these laws prohibited loans and any other 
financial assistance to belligerents (whatever the cause of war) and im- 
posed an arms embargo on all parties (regardless of who the victim was). 
Purchases of nonmilitary goods for cash were allowed only if they were 
transported in non-American ships. 15 The Congress was not abjuring 
profits so much as it was rejecting risks. As the aggressors bestrode Eu- 
rope, America abolished the distinction between aggressor and victim by 
legislating a single set of restrictions on both. 

The national interest came to be defined in legal rather than geostrate- 
gic terms. In March 1936, Secretary of State Hull advised Roosevelt in 
exclusively legal terms about the significance of the remilitarization of 
the Rhineland, which had toppled the military balance of Europe and left 
the countries of Eastern Europe defenseless: “It would appear from this 
brief analysis that the action of the German Government has constituted 
both a violation of the Versailles and Locarno pacts, but as far as the 
United States is concerned it does not appear to constitute a violation of 
our treaty 16 of August 25, 1921 with Germany ” 17 


378 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


After his landslide electoral victory of 1936, Roosevelt went far beyond 
the existing framework. In fact, he demonstrated that, though preoccu- 
pied with the Depression, he had grasped the essence of the dictators’ 
challenge better than any European leader except Churchill. At first, he 
sought merely to enunciate America’s moral commitment to the cause of 
the democracies. Roosevelt began this educational process with the so- 
called Quarantine Speech, which he delivered in Chicago on October 3, 
1937. It was his first warning to America of the approaching peril, and his 
first public statement that America might have to assume some responsi- 
bilities with respect to it. Japan’s renewed military aggression in China, 
coupled with the previous year’s announcement of the Berlin-Rome Axis, 
provided the backdrop, giving Roosevelt’s concerns a global dimension: 

The peace, the freedom and the security of ninety percent of the popu- 
lation of the world is being jeopardized by the remaining ten percent 
who are threatening a breakdown of all international order and law. . . . 

It seems to be unfortunately true that the epidemic of world lawlessness 
is spreading. When an epidemic of physical disease starts to spread, the 
community approves and joins in a quarantine of the patients in order 
to protect the health of the community against the spread of the dis- 
ease . 18 

Roosevelt was careful not to spell out what he meant by “quarantine” and 
what, if any, specific measures he might have in mind. Had the speech 
implied any kind of action, it would have been inconsistent with the 
Neutrality Acts, which the Congress had overwhelmingly approved and 
the President had recently signed. 

Not surprisingly, the Quarantine Speech was attacked by isolationists, 
who demanded clarification of the President’s intentions. They argued 
passionately that the distinction between “peace-loving” and “warlike” 
nations implied an American value judgment which, in turn, would lead 
to the abandonment of the policy of nonintervention, to which both 
Roosevelt and the Congress had pledged themselves. Two years later, 
Roosevelt described the uproar that resulted from the speech as follows: 
“Unfortunately, this suggestion fell upon deaf ears — even hostile and 

resentful ears It was hailed as war mongering; it was condemned as 

attempted intervention in foreign affairs; it was even ridiculed as a ner- 
vous search under the bed’ for dangers of war which did not exist.” 19 

Roosevelt could have ended the controversy by simply denying the 
intentions being ascribed to him. Yet, despite the critical onslaught, Roo- 
sevelt spoke ambiguously enough at a news conference to keep open the 
option of collective defense of some kind. According to the journalistic 


379 



Diplomacy 


practice of the day, the President always met with the press off-the-record, 
which meant that he could neither be quoted nor identified, and these 
rules were respected. 

Years later, the historian Charles Beard published a transcript showing 
Roosevelt dodging and weaving but never denying that the Quarantine 
Speech represented a new approach, while refusing to say just what the 
new approach was. 20 Roosevelt insisted that his speech implied actions 
that went beyond moral condemnation of aggression: “There are a lot of 
methods in the world that have never been tried yet.” 21 Asked whether 
this meant that he had a plan, Roosevelt replied, “I can’t give you any clue 
to it. You will have to invent one. I have got one." 22 He never explained 
what that plan was. 

Roosevelt the statesman might warn against the impending danger; 
Roosevelt the political leader had to navigate among three currents of 
American opinion: a small group advocating unambiguous support for all 
“peace-loving” nations; a somewhat more significant group that went 
along with such support as long as it stopped well short of war; and a vast 
majority supporting the letter and the spirit of the neutrality legislation. A 
skillful political leader will always try to keep open as many options as 
possible. He will want to present his ultimate course as his own optimum 
choice rather than as having been imposed by events. And no modern 
American president was better at this kind of tactical management than 
Roosevelt. 

In a Fireside Chat devoted mostly to domestic issues on October 12, 
1937 — a week after the Quarantine Speech — Roosevelt tried to satisfy all 
three groups. Underlining his commitment to peace, he spoke approv- 
ingly of a forthcoming conference of the signatories of the Washington 
Naval Treaty of 1922 and described American participation in it as a 
demonstration of “our purpose to cooperate with the other signatories 
to this Treaty, including China and Japan.” 23 The conciliatory language 
suggested a desire for peace, even with Japan; at the same time, it would 
serve as a demonstration of good faith if cooperation with Japan should 
prove impossible. Roosevelt was equally ambiguous about America’s in- 
ternational role. He reminded his audience of his own wartime experi- 
ence as Assistant Secretary of the Navy: . . remembering] that from 1913 
to 1921, I personally was fairly close to world events, and in that period, 
while I learned much of what to do, I also learned much of what not to 
do.” 24 

Roosevelt surely would not have objected if his audience had interpre- 
ted this ambiguous statement to mean that his wartime experiences had 
taught him the importance of nonentanglement. On the other hand, if 


380 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


that was in fact what Roosevelt meant, he would have gained far more 
popularity had he simply said so. In the light of his later actions, it is 
more likely that Roosevelt meant to suggest that he would pursue the 
Wilsonian tradition by means of more realistic methods. 

Despite the hostile reaction to his pronouncements, Roosevelt told 
Colonel Edward Flouse, Wilson’s erstwhile confidant, in October 1937, 
that it would take time to “make people realize that war will be a greater 
danger to us if we close all doors and windows than if we go out in the 
street and use our influence to curb the riot.” 25 It was another way of 
saying that the United States would need to participate in international 
affairs in an as yet unspecified way to help quell the pattern of aggression. 

Roosevelt’s immediate problem was an outburst of pro-isolationist sen- 
timent. In January 1938, the House of Representatives nearly passed a 
constitutional amendment requiring a national referendum for declara- 
tions of war except in the event of an invasion of the United States. 
Roosevelt had to make a personal appeal to prevent its passage. In these 
circumstances, Roosevelt viewed discretion as the better part of valor. In 
March 1938, the United States government did not react to Austria’s An- 
schluss to Germany, following the pattern of the European democracies, 
which had confined themselves to perfunctory protests. During the crisis 
leading to the Munich Conference, Roosevelt felt obliged to emphasize 
repeatedly that America would not join a united front against Hitler. And 
he disavowed subordinates and even close friends who so much as hinted 
at that possibility. 

In early September 1938, at a dinner celebrating Franco-American rela- 
tions, the American Ambassador to France, William C. Bullitt, repeated a 
standard platitude — that France and the United States were “united in 
war and peace.” 26 This was enough to trigger an isolationist uproar. 
Roosevelt, who could not have known of Bullitt’s comments in advance 
since they were the sort of boilerplate rhetoric left to the discretion of 
ambassadors, nevertheless took pains to reject the insinuation that the 
United States was aligning itself with the democracies as being “100 per- 
cent wrong.” 27 Later that month, when war seemed imminent and after 
Chamberlain had already met with Hitler twice, Roosevelt sent Chamber- 
lain two messages, on September 26 and 28, urging a conference of the 
interested powers that, in the existing circumstances, could only magnify 
pressures for major Czech concessions. 

Munich seems to have been the turning point which impelled Roose- 
velt to align America with the European democracies, at first politically 
but gradually materially as well. From then on, his commitment to thwart- 
ing the dictators was inexorable, culminating three years later in Amer- 


381 



Diplomacy 


ica’s entry into a second world war. The interplay between leaders and 
their publics in a democracy is always complex. A leader who confines 
himself to the experience of his people in a period of upheaval purchases 
temporary popularity at the price of condemnation by posterity, whose 
claims he is neglecting. A leader who gets too far ahead of his society 
will become irrelevant. A great leader must be an educator, bridging 
the gap between his visions and the familiar. But he must also be will- 
ing to walk alone to enable his society to follow the path he has 
selected. 

There is inevitably in every great leader an element of guile which 
simplifies, sometimes the objectives, sometimes the magnitude, of the 
task. But his ultimate test is whether he incarnates the truth of his society’s 
values and the essence of its challenges. These qualities Roosevelt pos- 
sessed to an unusual degree. He deeply believed in America; he was 
convinced that Nazism was both evil and a threat to American security, 
and he was extraordinarily guileful. And he was prepared to shoulder the 
burden of lonely decisions. Like a tightrope walker, he had to move, step 
by careful, anguishing step, across the chasm between his goal and his 
society’s reality in demonstrating to it that the far shore was in fact safer 
than the familiar promontory. 

On October 26, 1938, less than four weeks after the Munich Pact, Roose- 
velt returned to the theme of his Quarantine Speech. In a radio address 
to the Herald-Tribune Forum, he warned against unnamed but easily 
identifiable aggressors whose “national policy adopts as a deliberate in- 
strument the threat of war.” 28 Next, while upholding disarmament in 
principle, Roosevelt also called for strengthening America’s defenses: 


... we have consistently pointed out that neither we, nor any nation, 
will accept disarmament while neighbor nations arm to the teeth. If 
there is not general disarmament, we ourselves must continue to arm. 
It is a step we do not like to take, and do not wish to take. But, until 
there is general abandonment of weapons capable of aggression, ordi- 
nary rules of national prudence and common sense require that we be 
prepared. 29 


In secret, Roosevelt went much further. At the end of October 1938, in 
separate conversations with the British air minister and also with a per- 
sonal friend of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, he put forward a 
project designed to circumvent the Neutrality Acts. Proposing an outright 
evasion of legislation he had only recently signed, Roosevelt suggested 


382 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


setting up British and French airplane-assembly plants in Canada, near 
the American border. The United States would supply all the components, 
leaving only the final assembly to Great Britain and France. This arrange- 
ment would technically permit the project to stay within the letter of the 
Neutrality Acts, presumably on the ground that the component parts were 
civilian goods. Roosevelt told Chamberlain’s emissary that, “in the event 
of war with the dictators, he had the industrial resources of the American 
nation behind him.” 30 

Roosevelt’s scheme for helping the democracies restore their air power 
collapsed, as it was bound to, if only because of the sheer logistical 
impossibility of undertaking an effort on such a scale in secret. But from 
then on, Roosevelt s support for Britain and France was limited only when 
the Congress and public opinion could neither be circumvented nor 
overcome. 

In early 1939, in his State of the Union message, Roosevelt identified 
the aggressor nations as being Italy, Germany, and Japan. Alluding to the 
theme of his Quarantine Speech, he pointed out that “there are many 
methods short of war, but stronger and more effective than mere words, 
of bringing home to aggressor governments the aggregate sentiments of 
our own people.” 31 

In April 1939, within a month of the Nazi occupation of Prague, Roose- 
velt for the first time designated aggression against smaller countries as 
constituting a general threat to American security. At a press conference 
on April 8, 1939, Roosevelt told reporters that “the continued political, 
economic and social independence of every small nation in the world 
does have an effect on our national safety and prosperity. Each one that 
disappears weakens our national safety and prosperity.” 32 In a speech 
before the Pan American Union on April 14, he went a step further by 
arguing that the United States’ security interests could no longer be lim- 
ited to the Monroe Doctrine: 


Beyond question, within a scant few years air fleets will cross the ocean 
as easily as today they cross the closed European seas. Economic func- 
tioning of the world becomes therefore necessarily a unit; no interrup- 
tion of it anywhere can fail, in the future, to disrupt economic life 
everywhere. 

The past generation in Pan American matters was concerned with 
constructing the principles and the mechanisms through which this 
hemisphere would work together. But the next generation will be con- 
cerned with the methods by which the New World can live together in 
peace with the Old . 33 


383 



Diplomacy 


In April 1939, Roosevelt addressed Hitler and Mussolini directly in a 
message which, though ridiculed by the dictators, had been cleverly de- 
signed to demonstrate to the American people that the Axis countries 
indeed had aggressive designs. Surely one of America’s subtlest and most 
devious presidents, Roosevelt asked the dictators — but not Great Britain 
or France — for assurances that they would not attack some thirty-one 
specific European and Asian nations for a period of ten years. 34 Roosevelt 
then undertook to obtain similar assurances from those thirty-one nations 
with respect to Germany and Italy. Finally, he offered America’s participa- 
tion in any disarmament conference resulting from a relaxation of ten- 
sions. 

Roosevelt’s note will not go down in diplomatic history for meticulous 
staff work. For instance, Syria and Palestine, French and British mandates 
respectively, were listed as independent states. 35 Hitler had a grand time 
using Roosevelt’s message as a prop in one of his Reichstag speeches. To 
general hilarity, Hitler slowly read the long list of countries which Roose- 
velt was imploring him to leave alone. As the Fiihrer pronounced the 
names of country after country in a bemused tone of voice, peals of 
laughter echoed through the Reichstag. Hitler proceeded to inquire of 
each of the countries listed in Roosevelt’s note, many of which were 
already quaking before him, whether they indeed felt menaced. They, of 
course, strenuously denied any such concern. 

Though Hitler scored the oratorical point, Roosevelt achieved his polit- 
ical objective. By asking only Hitler and Mussolini for assurances, he had 
stigmatized them as the aggressors before the only audience that, for 
the moment, mattered to Roosevelt — the American people. To enlist the 
American public in supporting the democracies, Roosevelt needed to 
frame the issues in terms that went beyond the balance of power and to 
portray them as a struggle in defense of innocent victims against an evil 
aggressor. Both his note and Hitler’s reaction to it helped him to achieve 
that objective. 

Roosevelt was quick to translate America’s new psychological threshold 
into strategic coin. During the same month, April 1939, he inched the 
United States closer to de facto military cooperation with Great Britain. 
An agreement between the two countries freed the Royal Navy to concen- 
trate all of its forces in the Atlantic while the United States moved the 
bulk of its fleet to the Pacific. This division of labor implied that the 
United States assumed responsibility for the defense of Great Britain’s 
Asian possessions against Japan. Prior to World War I, an analogous ar- 
rangement between Great Britain and France (which had led to the con- 
centration of the French fleet in the Mediterranean) had been used as an 


384 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


argument that Great Britain was morally obliged to enter World War I in 
defense of France’s Atlantic coast. 

Isolationists observing Roosevelt’s actions were deeply disturbed. In 
February 1939, before the outbreak of the war, Senator Arthur Vanden- 
berg had eloquently put forward the isolationist case: 

True, we do live in a foreshortened world in which, compared with 
Washington’s day, time and space are relatively annihilated. But I still 
thank God for two insulating oceans; and even though they be fore- 
shortened, they are still our supreme benediction if they be widely and 
prudently used. . . . 

We all have our sympathies and our natural emotions in behalf of the 
victims of national or international outrage all around the globe; but we 
are not, we cannot be, the world’s protector or the world’s policeman. 36 

When, in response to the German invasion of Poland, Great Britain de- 
clared war on September 3, 1939, Roosevelt had no choice but to invoke 
the Neutrality Acts. At the same time, he moved rapidly to modify the 
legislation to permit Great Britain and France to purchase American arms. 

Roosevelt had avoided invoking the Neutrality Acts in the war between 
Japan and China, ostensibly because no war had been declared, in reality 
because he believed that an arms embargo would hurt China far more 
than it would Japan. But if war broke out in Europe, it would be formally 
declared and he would not be able to resort to subterfuge to circumvent 
the Neutrality Acts. Therefore, in early 1939, Roosevelt called for a revi- 
sion of the Neutrality Acts on the ground that they “may operate unevenly 
and unfairly — and may actually give aid to the aggressor and deny it to 
the victim.” 37 The Congress did not act until after the European war had 
actually started. Indicating the strength of the isolationist mood, Roose- 
velt’s proposal had been defeated three times in the Congress earlier in 
the year. 

The same day that Great Britain declared war, Roosevelt called a special 
session of the Congress for September 21. This time, he prevailed. The 
so-called Fourth Neutrality Act of November 4, 1939, permitted belliger- 
ents to purchase arms and ammunition from the United States, provided 
they paid in cash and transported their purchases in their own or neutral 
ships. Since, because of the British blockade, only Great Britain and 
France were in a position to do so, “neutrality” was becoming an increas- 
ingly technical term. The Neutrality Acts had lasted only as long as there 
had been nothing to be neutral about. 

During the so-called phony war, America’s leaders continued to believe 


385 



Diplomacy 


that only material aid was required of them. Conventional wisdom had it 
that the French army, behind the Maginot Line, and backed by the Royal 
Navy, would strangle Germany through the combination of a defensive 
ground war and a naval blockade. 

In February 1940, Roosevelt sent Undersecretary of State Sumner 
Welles on a mission to Europe to explore the possibilities of peace during 
the “phony war.” French Prime Minister Daladier inferred that Welles 
was urging a compromise peace that left Germany in control of Central 
Europe, though the majority of Welles’ interlocutors did not interpret his 
remarks that way and, for Daladier, the wish may have been father to the 
thought. 38 Roosevelt’s purpose in sending Welles to Europe had been not 
to mediate so much as to demonstrate his commitment to peace to his 
isolationist people. He also wanted to establish America’s claim to partici- 
pation should the “phony war” culminate in a peace settlement. Ger- 
many’s assault on Norway a few weeks later put an end to that particular 
mission. 

On June 10, 1940, as France was falling to the Nazi invaders, Roosevelt 
abandoned formal neutrality and came down eloquently on the side of 
Great Britain. In a powerful speech in Charlottesville, Virginia, he com- 
bined a scathing denunciation of Mussolini, whose armies had attacked 
France that day, with America’s commitment to extend all-out material 
aid to every country resisting German aggression. At the same time, he 
proclaimed that America would increase its own defenses: 

On this tenth day of June, 1940, in this University founded by the first 
great American teacher of democracy, we send forth our prayers and 
our hopes to those beyond the seas who are maintaining with magnifi- 
cent valor their battle for freedom. 

In our American unity, we will pursue two obvious and simultaneous 
courses; we will extend to the opponents of force the material re- 
sources of this nation; and, at the same time, we will harness and speed 
up the use of those resources in order that we ourselves in the Ameri- 
cas may have equipment and training equal to the task of any emer- 
gency and every defense. 39 


Roosevelt’s Charlottesville speech marked a watershed. Faced with Great 
Britain’s imminent defeat, any American president might have discovered 
in the Royal Navy an essential component to the security of the Western 
Hemisphere. But it is difficult to imagine any contemporary of Roosevelt 
— of either political party — who, having had the courage and foresight to 
recognize the challenge, would have had the willpower to lead his isola- 


386 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


tionist people, step by step, toward the commitment to do whatever was 
necessary to defeat Nazi Germany. 

The expectation thus raised that America would, sooner or later, be- 
come Great Britain’s ally was surely one of the most decisive elements in 
sustaining Churchill’s decision to continue to fight alone: 

We shall go on to the end — And even if, which I do not for a moment 
believe, this island or a large part of it were subjugated and starving, 
then our Empire beyond the seas, armed and guarded by the British 
Fleet, would carry on the struggle, until, in God s good time, the New 
World, with all its power and might, steps forth to the rescue and the 
liberation of the Old. 40 


Roosevelt’s methods were complex — elevated in their statement of objec- 
tives, devious in tactic, explicit in defining the issues, and less than frank 
in explaining the intricacies of particular events. Many of Roosevelt’s 
actions were on the fringes of constitutionality. No contemporary presi- 
dent could resort to Roosevelts methods and remain in office. Yet Roose- 
velt had clearly seen that America’s margin of safety was shrinking and 
that a victory of the Axis Powers would eliminate it. Above all, he found 
Hitler to be anathema to all the values for which America had historically 
stood. 

After the fall of France, Roosevelt increasingly stressed the imminent 
threat to American security. To Roosevelt, the Atlantic was possessed of 
the same meaning which the English Channel held for British statesmen. 
He saw it as a vital national interest that it not be dominated by Hitler. 
Thus, in his State of the Union Address of January 6, 1941, Roosevelt 
linked American security to the survival of the Royal Navy: 

I have recently pointed out how quickly the tempo of modern warfare 
could bring into our very midst the physical attack which we must 
eventually expect if the dictator nations win the war. 

There is much loose talk of our immunity from immediate and direct 
invasion from across the seas. Obviously, as long as the British Navy 
retains its powers, no such danger exists. 41 

Of course, if that were true, America was obliged to make every effort to 
prevent Great Britain’s defeat — in the extreme case, even to enter the 
war itself. 

Roosevelt had for many months been acting on the premise that 
America might have to enter the war. In September 1940, he had devised 


387 



Diplomacy 


an ingenious arrangement to give Great Britain fifty allegedly over-age 
destroyers in exchange for the right to set up American bases on eight 
British possessions, from Newfoundland to the South American mainland. 
Winston Churchill later called it a “decidedly unneutral act,” for the de- 
stroyers were far more important to Great Britain than the bases were to 
America. Most of them were quite remote from any conceivable theater 
of operations, and some even duplicated existing American bases. More 
than anything, the destroyer deal represented a pretext based on a legal 
opinion by Roosevelt’s own appointee, Attorney General Francis Biddle 
— hardly an objective observer. 

Roosevelt sought neither Congressional approval nor modification of 
the Neutrality Acts for his destroyer-for-bases deal. Nor was he chal- 
lenged, as inconceivable as that seems in the light of contemporary prac- 
tice. It was the measure of Roosevelt’s concern about a possible Nazi 
victory and of his commitment to bolstering British morale, that he took 
this step as a presidential election campaign was just beginning. (It 
was fortunate for Great Britain and for the cause of American unity that 
the foreign policy views of his opponent, Wendell Willkie, were not sig- 
nificantly different from Roosevelts.) 

Concurrently, Roosevelt vastly increased the American defense budget 
and, in 1940, induced the Congress to introduce peacetime conscription. 
So strong was lingering isolationist sentiment that conscription was re- 
newed by only one vote in the House of Representatives in the summer 
of 1941, less than four months before the outbreak of the war. 

Immediately after the election, Roosevelt moved to eliminate the re- 
quirement of the Fourth Neutrality Act — that American war materials 
could only be purchased for cash. In a Fireside Chat, borrowing a term 
from Wilson, he challenged the United States to become the “arsenal of 
democracy.” 42 The legal instrument for bringing this about was the Lend- 
Lease Act, which gave the President discretionary authority to lend, lease, 
sell, or barter under any terms he deemed proper any defense article to 
“the government of any country whose defense the President deems vital 
to the defense of the United States.” Secretary of State Hull, normally a 
passionate Wilsonian and an advocate of collective security, rather un- 
characteristically justified the Lend-Lease Act on strategic grounds. With- 
out massive American help, he argued, Great Britain would fall and 
control of the Atlantic would pass into hostile hands, jeopardizing the 
security of the Western Hemisphere. 43 

Yet, if this were true, America could avoid participation in the war only 
if Great Britain were by itself able to overcome Hitler, which even 
Churchill did not believe was possible. Senator Taft stressed this point in 


388 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


his opposition to Lend-Lease. The isolationists organized themselves as 
the so-called America First Committee, headed by General Robert E. 
Wood, Chairman of the board of Sears, Roebuck and Company, and sup- 
ported by prominent leaders in many fields, among them Kathleen Nor- 
ris, Irvin S. Cobb, Charles A. Lindbergh, Henry Ford, General Hugh S, 
Johnson, Chester Bowles, and Theodore Roosevelt’s daughter, Mrs. Nich- 
olas Longworth. 

The passion behind the isolationists’ opposition to Lend-Lease was cap- 
tured in a comment by Senator Arthur Vandenberg, one of their most 
thoughtful spokesmen, on March 11, 1941: “We have tossed Washington’s 
Farewell Address into the discard. We have thrown ourselves squarely 
into the power politics and the power wars of Europe, Asia and Africa. 
We have taken the first step upon a course from which we can never 
hereafter retreat.” 44 Vandenberg’s analysis was correct, but it was the 
world that had imposed the necessity; and it was Roosevelt’s merit to have 
recognized it. 

After proposing Lend-Lease, Roosevelt made his determination to bring 
about the defeat of the Nazis more explicit with every passing month. 
Even before the Act was passed, the British and American chiefs of staff, 
anticipating its approval, met to organize the resources about to be made 
available. While together, they also began planning for the time when the 
United States would be an active participant in the war. For these plan- 
ners, only the timing of America’s entry into the war remained yet to be 
settled. Roosevelt did not initial the so-called ABC- 1 Agreement, according 
to which, in case of war, top priority would be given to the struggle 
against Germany. But it was clear that this was due to domestic impera- 
tives and constitutional restrictions, not to any ambiguity about his pur- 
poses. 

Nazi atrocities increasingly eroded the distinction between fighting to 
promote American values and fighting to defend American security. Hitler 
had gone so far beyond any acceptable norm of morality that the battle 
against him assimilated the triumph of good over evil into the struggle 
for naked survival. Thus, in January 1941, Roosevelt summed up America s 
objectives in what he called the Four Freedoms: freedom of speech, 
freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear. These 
goals went far beyond those of any previous European war. Not even 
Wilson had proclaimed a social issue like freedom from want as a war 
aim. 

In April 1941, Roosevelt took another step toward war by authorizing 
an agreement with the Danish representative in Washington (whose rank 
was minister) to allow American forces to occupy Greenland. Since Den- 


389 



Diplomacy 


mark was under German occupation and since no Danish government- 
in-exile had been formed, the diplomat without a country took it upon 
himself to “authorize” American bases on Danish soil. At the same time, 
Roosevelt privately informed Churchill that, henceforth, American ships 
would patrol the North Atlantic west of Iceland — covering about two- 
thirds of the entire ocean — and “publish the position of possible aggres- 
sor ships or planes when located in the American patrol area.” 45 Three 
months later, at the invitation of the local government, American troops 
landed in Iceland, another Danish possession, to replace British forces. 
Then, without Congressional approval, Roosevelt declared the whole area 
between these Danish possessions and North America a part of the West- 
ern Hemisphere Defense system. 

In a lengthy radio address on May 27, 1941, Roosevelt announced a 
state of emergency and restated Americas commitment to social and 
economic progress: 

We will not accept a Hitler-dominated world. And we will not accept a 
world, like the postwar world of the 1920s, in which the seeds of 
Hitlerism can again be planted and allowed to grow. 

We will accept only a world consecrated to freedom of speech and 
expression — freedom of every person to worship God in his own way 
— freedom from want — and freedom from terror. 46 

The phrase “will not accept” had to mean that Roosevelt was in effect 
committing America to go to war for the Four Freedoms if they could not 
be achieved in any other way. 

Few American presidents have been as sensitive and perspicacious as 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt was in his grasp of the psychology of his 
people. Roosevelt understood that only a threat to their security could 
motivate them to support military preparedness. But to take them into a 
war, he knew he needed to appeal to their idealism in much the same 
way that Wilson had. In Roosevelt’s view, America’s security needs might 
well be met by control of the Atlantic, but its war aims required some 
vision of a new world order. Thus “balance of power” was not a term 
ever found in Roosevelt’s pronouncements, except when he used it dis- 
paragingly. What he sought was to bring about a world community com- 
patible with America’s democratic and social ideals as the best guarantee 
of peace. 

In this atmosphere, the president of a technically neutral United States 
and Great Britain’s quintessential wartime leader, Winston Churchill, met 
in August 1941 on a cruiser off the coast of Newfoundland. Great Britain’s 


390 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


position had improved somewhat when Hitler invaded the Soviet Union 
in June, but England was far from assured of victory. Nevertheless, the 
joint statement these two leaders issued reflected not a statement of 
traditional war aims but the design of a totally new world bearing Amer- 
ica’s imprimatur. The Atlantic Charter proclaimed a set of "common prin- 
ciples” on which the President and Prime Minister based "their hopes for 
a better future for the world .” 47 These principles enlarged upon Roose- 
velt’s original Four Freedoms by incorporating equal access to raw mate- 
rials and cooperative efforts to improve social conditions around the 
world. 

The Atlantic Charter cast the problem of postwar security entirely in 
Wilsonian terms and contained no geopolitical component at all. "After 
the final destruction of the Nazi tyranny,” the free nations would re- 
nounce the use of force and impose permanent disarmament on the 
nations "which threaten . . . aggression.” This would lead to the encour- 
agement of "all other practicable measures which will lighten for peace- 
loving peoples the crushing burden of armaments .” 48 Two categories of 
nations were being envisaged: aggressor nations (specifically Germany, 
Japan, and Italy), which would be permanently disarmed, and "peace- 
loving countries,” which would be permitted to retain military forces, 
though, it was hoped, at greatly reduced levels. National self-determina- 
tion would serve as the cornerstone of this new world order. 

The difference between the Atlantic Charter and the Pitt Plan, by which 
Great Britain had proposed to end the Napoleonic Wars, showed the 
extent to which Great Britain had become the junior partner in the Anglo- 
American relationship. Not once did the Atlantic Charter refer to a new 
balance of power, whereas the Pitt Plan had purported to be about noth- 
ing else. It was not that Great Britain had become oblivious to the balance 
of power after just having fought the most desperate war in its long 
history; rather, Churchill had realized that America’s entry into the war 
would of itself alter the balance of power in Great Britain’s favor. In the 
meantime, he had to subordinate long-term British objectives to immedi- 
ate necessities — something Great Britain had never felt obliged to do 
during the Napoleonic Wars. 

When the Atlantic Charter was proclaimed, German armies were ap- 
proaching Moscow and Japanese forces were preparing to move into 
Southeast Asia. Churchill was above all concerned with removing the 
obstacles to America’s participation in the war. For he understood very 
well that, by itself, Great Britain would not be able to achieve a decisive 
victory, even with Soviet participation in the war and American material 
support. In addition, the Soviet Union might collapse and some compro- 


391 



Diplomacy 


mise between Hitler and Stalin was always a possibility, threatening Great 
Britain with renewed isolation. Churchill saw no point in debating post- 
war structure before he could even be certain that there would be one. 

In September 1941, the United States crossed the line into belligerency. 
Roosevelt’s order that the position of German submarines be reported to 
the British Navy had made it inevitable that, sooner or later, some clash 
would occur. On September 4, 1941, the American destroyer Greer was 
torpedoed while signaling the location of a German submarine to British 
airplanes. On September 11, without describing the circumstances, Roo- 
sevelt denounced German “piracy.” Comparing German submarines to a 
rattlesnake coiled to strike, he ordered the United States Navy to sink “on 
sight” any German or Italian submarines discovered in the previously 
established American defense area extending all the way to Iceland. To all 
practical purposes, America was at war on the sea with the Axis powers. 49 

Simultaneously, Roosevelt took up the challenge of Japan. In response 
to Japan’s occupation of Indochina in July 1941, he abrogated America’s 
commercial treaty with Japan, forbade the sale of scrap metal to it, and 
encouraged the Dutch government-in-exile to stop oil exports to Japan 
from the Dutch East Indies (present-day Indonesia). These pressures led 
to negotiations with Japan, which began in October 1941. Roosevelt in- 
structed the American negotiators to demand that Japan relinquish all of 
its conquests, including Manchuria, by invoking America’s previous re- 
fusal to “recognize” these acts. 

Roosevelt must have known that there was no possibility that Japan 
would accept. On December 7, 1941, following the pattern of the Russo- 
Japanese War, Japan launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor and de- 
stroyed a significant part of America’s Pacific fleet. On December 11, 
Hitler honored his treaty with Tokyo by declaring war on the United 
States. Why Hitler thus freed Roosevelt to concentrate America’s war effort 
on the countiy Roosevelt had always considered to be the principal 
enemy has never been satisfactorily explained. 

America’s entiy into the war marked the culmination of a great and 
daring leader’s extraordinary diplomatic enterprise. In less than three 
years, Roosevelt had taken his staunchly isolationist people into a global 
war. As late as May 1940, 64 percent of Americans had considered the 
preservation of peace more important than the defeat of the Nazis. Eigh- 
teen months later, in December 1941, just before the attack on Pearl 
Harbor, the proportions had been reversed — only 32 percent favored 
peace over preventing triumph. 50 

Roosevelt had achieved his goal patiently and inexorably, educating his 
people one step at a time about the necessities before them. His audi- 


392 



America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 


ences filtered his words through their own preconceptions and did not 
always understand that his ultimate destination was war, though they 
could not have doubted that it was confrontation. In fact, Roosevelt was 
not so much bent on war as on defeating the Nazis; it was simply that, as 
time passed, the Nazis could only be defeated if America entered the war. 

That their entry into the war should have seemed so sudden to the 
American people was due to three factors: Americans had had no experi- 
ence with going to war for security concerns outside the Western Hemi- 
sphere; many believed that the European democracies could prevail on 
their own, while few understood the nature of the diplomacy that had 
preceded Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor or Hitler’s rash declaration of 
war on the United States. It was a measure of the United States’ deep- 
seated isolationism that it had to be bombed at Pearl Harbor before it 
would enter the war in the Pacific; and that, in Europe, it was Hitler who 
would ultimately declare war on the United States rather than the other 
way around. 

By initiating hostilities, the Axis powers had solved Roosevelt’s linger- 
ing dilemma about how to move the American people into the war. Had 
Japan focused its attack on Southeast Asia and Hitler not declared war 
against the United States, Roosevelt’s task of steering his people toward 
his views would have been much more complicated. In light of Roose- 
velt’s proclaimed moral and strategic convictions, there can be little doubt 
that, in the end, he would have somehow managed to enlist America in 
the struggle he considered so decisive to both the future of freedom and 
to American security. 

Subsequent generations of Americans have placed a greater premium 
on total candor by their chief executive. Yet, like Lincoln, Roosevelt 
sensed that the survival of his country and its values was at stake, and that 
history itself would hold him responsible for the results of his solitary 
initiatives. And, as was the case with Lincoln, it is a measure of the debt 
free peoples owe to Franklin Delano Roosevelt that the wisdom of his 
solitary passage is now, quite simply, taken for granted. 


393 



CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

Three Approaches to Peace: 
Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill 
in World War II 


When he attacked the Soviet Union, Hitler launched the most massive 
land war in the history of mankind. The horror of that war was unprece- 
dented even in comparison to the barbarity attending previous European 
conflicts. It was a genocidal struggle to the finish. As German armies 
thrashed their way deep into Russia, Hitler declared war on the United 
States, turning what had been a European war into a global struggle. The 
German army ravaged Russia, but was unable to score a knockout blow. 
In the winter of 1941, it was stopped at the outskirts of Moscow. Then, in 
the winter of 1942-43, the German offensive, this time aimed at southern 


394 



Three Approaches to Peace 


Russia, ground to a halt. In a vicious battle in frozen Stalingrad, Hitler lost 
the entire Sixth Army. The back of the German war effort was broken. 
The Allied leaders — Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin — could now begin 
to think about victory, and the future shape of the world. 

Each of the victors was speaking in terms of his own nation’s historical 
experiences. Churchill wanted to reconstruct the traditional balance of 
power in Europe. This meant rebuilding Great Britain, France, and even 
defeated Germany so that, along with the United States, these countries 
could counterbalance the Soviet colossus to the east. Roosevelt envi- 
sioned a postwar order in which the three victors, along with China, 
would act as a board of directors of the world, enforcing the peace against 
any potential miscreant, which he thought would most likely be Germany 
— a vision that was to become known as the “Four Policemen.” Stalin’s 
approach reflected both his communist ideology and traditional Russian 
foreign policy. He strove to cash in on his country’s victory by extending 
Russian influence into Central Europe. And he intended to turn the coun- 
tries conquered by Soviet armies into buffer zones to protect Russia 
against any future German aggression. 

Roosevelt had been far ahead of his people when he discerned that a 
Hitler victory would jeopardize American security. But he was at one with 
his people in rejecting the traditional world of European diplomacy. 
When he insisted that a Nazi victory would threaten America, he did not 
mean to enlist America on behalf of restoring the European balance of 
power. To Roosevelt, the purpose of the war was to remove Hitler as the 
obstacle to a cooperative international order based on harmony, not on 
equilibrium. 

Roosevelt was therefore impatient with truisms claiming to embody 
the lessons of history. He rejected the idea that a total defeat of Germany 
might create a vacuum, which a victorious Soviet Union might then try to 
fill. He refused to countenance safeguards against possible postwar rivalry 
among the victors, because these implied the reestablishment of the bal- 
ance of power, which he in fact wanted to destroy. Peace would be 
preserved by a system of collective security maintained by the wartime 
Allies acting in concert and sustained by mutual goodwill and vigilance. 

Since there would be no equilibrium to maintain but a state of univer- 
sal peace, Roosevelt determined that, after the defeat of Nazi Germany, 
the United States should call its military forces back home. Roosevelt had 
no intention of permanently stationing American forces in Europe, even 
less of doing so in order to counterbalance the Soviets, which, in his 
view, the American public would never countenance. On February 29, 
1944, before American troops ever set foot in France, he wrote to 
Churchill: 


395 



Diplomacy 


Do please don't ask me to keep any American forces in France. I just 
cannot do it! I would have to bring them all back home. As I suggested 
before, I denounce and protest the paternity of Belgium, France and 
Italy. You really ought to bring up and discipline your own children. In 
view of the fact that they may be your bulwark in future days, you 
should at least pay for their schooling now! 1 

In other words, Great Britain would have to defend Europe without any 
help from America. 

In the same spirit, Roosevelt rejected any American responsibility for 
the economic reconstruction of Europe: 

I do not want the United States to have the postwar burden of reconsti- 
tuting France, Italy and the Balkans. This is not our natural task at a 
distance of 3,500 miles or more. It is definitely a British task in which 
the British are far more vitally interested than we are. 2 

Roosevelt vastly overestimated the postwar capacities of Great Britain by 
asking it to handle simultaneously the defense and the reconstruction of 
Europe. Great Britain’s position in this scheme was all the more over- 
blown because of Roosevelt’s deep disdain for France. In February 1943 
at Yalta, the most important conference among the victors, Roosevelt 
chided Churchill in Stalin’s presence for “artificially” trying to build 
France into a strong power. As if the absurdity of such an endeavor 
required no elaboration, he mocked Churchill’s motive, which he de- 
scribed as an effort to establish a defense line along France’s eastern 
border, behind which Great Britain would then be able to assemble its 
army. 3 At that time, this happened to be the only conceivable means of 
opposing Soviet expansionism. 

Without being prepared to undertake a permanent American role, Roo- 
sevelt wanted the victorious Allies to supervise the disarming and parti- 
tioning of Germany and to subject various other countries to their control 
(amazingly, Roosevelt included France in the category of countries to be 
controlled). As early as the spring of 1942, on the occasion of a visit by 
Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov to Washington, Roosevelt sketched his 
idea of the “Four Policemen” to enforce peace in the postwar world. 
Harry Hopkins reported the President’s thinking in a letter to Churchill: 

Roosevelt had spoken to Molotov of a system allowing only the great 
powers — Great Britain, the United States, the Soviet Union, and possi- 
bly China — to have arms. These “policemen” would work together to 
preserve the peace. 4 


396 



Three Approaches to Peace 


Finally, Roosevelt was determined to put an end to the British and French 
colonial empires: 

When we’ve won the war, I will work with all my might and main to 
see to it that the United States is not wheedled into the position of 
accepting any plan that will further France’s imperialistic ambitions, or 
that will aid or abet the British Empire in its imperial ambitions. 5 

Roosevelt’s policy was a heady mixture of traditional American exception- 
alism, Wilsonian idealism, and Roosevelt s own canny insight into the 
American psyche, which had always been more attuned to universal 
causes than to calculations of rewards and penalties. Churchill had suc- 
ceeded too well in fostering the illusion that Great Britain was still a great 
power capable of resisting Soviet expansionism on its own. For only such 
a conviction can explain Roosevelt’s advocacy of a world order based on 
American troop withdrawals from overseas, a disarmed Germany, a 
France reduced to second-class status, and a Soviet Union left with a huge 
vacuum opening up before it. The postwar period thus turned into an 
exercise for teaching America just how essential it was to the new balance 
of power. 

Roosevelt’s scheme of the Four Policemen to bring about and guaran- 
tee global peace represented a compromise between Churchill’s tradi- 
tional balance-of-power approach and the unconstrained Wilsonianism of 
Roosevelt’s advisers as epitomized by Secretary of State Cordell Hull. 
Roosevelt was determined to avoid the failings of the League of Nations 
and the system which had been established in the wake of the First World 
War. He wanted some form of collective security, but knew from the 
experience of the 1920s that collective security required enforcers, and 
this was to be the role of the Four Policemen. 

Roosevelt’s concept of the Four Policemen was in fact structurally simi- 
lar to Metternich’s Holy Alliance, though American liberals would be 
horrified at such a thought. Each system represented an attempt to pre- 
serve the peace through a coalition of victors upholding shared values. 
Metternich’s system had worked because it had protected a genuine bal- 
ance of power, the key countries of which had in fact shared common 
values, and Russia, though at times disruptive, had more or less cooper- 
ated. Roosevelt’s concept could not be implemented because no real 
balance of power emerged from the war, because there was a profound 
ideological gulf between the victors, and because Stalin, once free of the 
threat of Germany, had no inhibition about pursuing Soviet ideological 
and political interests even at the price of confrontation with his erstwhile 
Allies. 


397 



Diplomacy 


Roosevelt made no provision for what might happen if one of the 
proposed Policemen refused to play the role assigned to it — especially if 
that Policeman turned out to be the Soviet Union. For, in that case, the 
despised balance of power would have to be reconstructed after all. 
And the more thoroughly the elements of traditional equilibrium were 
jettisoned, the more herculean the task of creating a new balance of 
power would become. 

Had he searched the world, Roosevelt could not have found an inter- 
locutor more different from himself than Stalin. Whereas Roosevelt 
wanted to implement the Wilsonian concept of international harmony, 
Stalin’s ideas about the conduct of foreign policy were strictly those of 
Old World Realpolitik . When an American general at the Potsdam Confer- 
ence tried to flatter Stalin by observing how gratifying it had to be to see 
Russian armies in Berlin, Stalin replied tartly, “Tsar Alexander I reached 
Paris.” 

Stalin defined the requirements of peace in the same way that Russian 
statesmen had for centuries — as the widest possible security belt around 
the Soviet Unions vast periphery. He welcomed Roosevelt’s emphasis on 
unconditional surrender because it would eliminate the Axis Powers as 
factors in a peace settlement and prevent the emergence of the German 
equivalent of Talleyrand at a peace conference. 

Ideology reinforced tradition. As a communist, Stalin refused to make 
any distinction between democratic and fascist nations, though he no 
doubt considered the democracies less ruthless and perhaps less formi- 
dable as well. Stalin possessed no conceptual apparatus to enable him to 
forgo territory on behalf of goodwill, or “objective” reality for the mood 
of the moment. Therefore, he was bound to propose to his democratic 
Allies the same arrangements that he had asked of Hitler a year earlier. 
Cooperation with Hitler had made him no more sympathetic to Nazism 
than his subsequent alliance with the democracies impelled him to ap- 
preciate the virtues of free institutions. He would take from each tempo- 
rary partner whatever was possible through diplomacy, and seize by force 
whatever had not been granted to him freely — as long as he could do so 
without risking war. His lodestar remained the Soviet national interest 
as refracted through the prism of communist ideology. To paraphrase 
Palmerston, he had no friends, only interests. 

Stalin had proved most ready to negotiate postwar aims when his mili- 
tary position was the most difficult. With the knife literally at his throat, 
he attempted to do so in December 1941, when Foreign Secretary An- 
thony Eden visited Moscow, and again in May 1942, when he sent Molotov 
to London and then to Washington. These efforts were thwarted, however, 


398 



Three Approaches to Peace 


because Roosevelt was passionately opposed to any detailed discussion 
of peace aims. After the battle of Stalingrad, Stalin became increasingly 
certain that the war would end with the Soviet Union in possession of 
most of the territories likely to be in dispute. Having less and less to gain 
from negotiations, Stalin entrusted the shape of the postwar world to the 
reach of his armies. 

Churchill would have been quite prepared to enter a negotiation with 
Stalin about the postwar European order before Stalin was ever in a 
position to seize his prizes. After all, expansionist allies like Stalin had 
been encountered and overcome more than once in British history. Had 
Great Britain been more powerful, Churchill surely would have sought 
to extract practical settlements from Stalin while he was still in need of 
assistance — much as Castlereagh had obtained his allies’ commitment to 
the freedom of the Low Countries well before the end of the Napoleonic 
Wars. 

Churchill had been in the war longer than either of his partners. For 
nearly a year after the fall of France in June 1940, Great Britain had stood 
alone against Hitler and had been in no position to reflect on postwar 
aims. Sheer survival was absorbing all of its energy, and the outcome of 
the war was quite uncertain. Even with massive American material help, 
Great Britain could not have hoped to win. If America and the Soviet 
Union had not entered the war when they did, Great Britain would have 
eventually been driven to compromise or defeat. 

Hitler’s attack on the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, Japan’s attack on 
Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, and Hitler’s bizarre declaration of 
war on the United States a few days later guaranteed that Great Britain 
would be on the winning side no matter how long and painful the war 
turned out to be. Only from that moment on could Churchill realistically 
begin to deal with war aims. He would have to do so in a context that was 
unprecedented for Great Britain. As the war went on, it became more 
and more apparent that Great Britain’s traditional goal of maintaining a 
balance of power in Europe was moving out of reach and that, after 
unconditional surrender was imposed on Germany, the Soviet Union 
would emerge as the dominant nation on the Continent, especially if the 
United States withdrew its forces. 

Churchill’s wartime diplomacy therefore consisted of maneuvering be- 
tween two behemoths — both of which threatened Great Britain’s posi- 
tion, albeit from opposite directions. Roosevelt’s advocacy of worldwide 
self-determination was a challenge to the British Empire; Stalin’s attempt 
to project the Soviet Union into the center of Europe threatened to under- 
mine British security. 


399 



Diplomacy 


Trapped between Wilsonian idealism and Russian expansionism, 
Churchill did his best, from a position of comparative weakness, to vindi- 
cate his country’s ancient policy — that, if the world is not to be left to the 
strongest and the most ruthless, peace must be based on some kind of 
equilibrium. He also clearly understood that, at the end of the war, Great 
Britain was no longer able to defend its vital interests all by itself, much 
less to police the balance of power. However outwardly self-assured, 
Churchill knew — better than his American friends, who still believed that 
Great Britain would be able to maintain the European equilibrium by 
itself — that his nations wartime role was to be its last as a truly indepen- 
dent global power. For Churchill, therefore, no aspect of Allied diplomacy 
was more important than creating bonds of friendship with America so 
solid that Great Britain would not need to face the postwar world alone. 
This was why, at the end of the day, he generally gave in to American 
preferences — although he often succeeded in convincing his American 
partner that Washington’s strategic interests closely corresponded to 
those of London. 

It proved to be a formidable task. For Roosevelt and his associates were 
profoundly suspicious of British motives, specifically of the possibility 
that Churchill might be concerned above all with advancing British na- 
tional and imperial interests and enhancing the balance of power rather 
than their own approach to world order. 

Most other societies would have treated the British pursuit of the na- 
tional interest as a matter of course. To American leaders, however,- it 
represented a flaw inherent in the British character. At a private dinner 
shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Roosevelt had put it this way: 

Our popular idea of that role may not be entirely objective — may not 
be one hundred per cent true from the British point of view, but there 
it is; and I’ve been trying to tell him [Churchill] that he ought to con- 
sider it. It’s in the American tradition, this distrust, this dislike and even 
hatred of Britain 6 

Since Roosevelt did not want to discuss war aims before Stalingrad, and 
since Stalin preferred to let the battle lines determine the political out- 
come afterward, most of the wartime ideas about a postwar order came 
from Churchill. The American reaction to them was aptly captured by 
Secretary of State Hull in November 1943, in terms highly disparaging to 
traditional British verities: 

. . . there will no longer be need for spheres of influence, for alliances, 
for balance of power, or any other of the special arrangements through 


400 



Three Approaches to Peace 


which, in the unhappy past, the nations strove to safeguard their secu- 
rity or to promote their interests . 7 

Throughout the war, Roosevelt was, on a human level, closer to Churchill 
than he was to almost any American. Yet, on specific issues, he could also 
be more acerbic toward the Prime Minister than he was toward Stalin. In 
Churchill, he found a wartime comrade-in-arms; in Stalin, he saw a part- 
ner in preserving postwar peace. 

America’s ambivalence toward Great Britain was focused on three is- 
sues: America’s own anticolonial tradition; the nature of wartime strategy; 
and the shape of postwar Europe. To be sure, Russia was also a huge 
empire, but its colonies were contiguous to its territory and Russian 
imperialism had never impinged on the American consciousness in the 
same way that British colonialism had. Churchill might complain that 
Roosevelts comparison of the Thirteen Colonies with British possessions 
in the twentieth century demonstrated “the difficulties of comparing situ- 
ations in various centuries and scenes where almost every material fact is 

totally different ” 8 Roosevelt, however, was less interested in refining 

historical analogies than in laying down fundamental American princi- 
ples. At his very first meeting with Churchill, at which the two leaders 
proclaimed the Atlantic Charter, Roosevelt insisted that the Charter apply 
not just in Europe, but everywhere, including the colonial areas: 

I am firmly of the belief that if we are to arrive at a stable peace it must 
involve the development of backward countries — I can’t believe that 
we can fight a war against fascist slavery, and at the same time not work 
to free people all over the world from a backward colonial policy . 9 

The British War Cabinet utterly rejected such an interpretation: 

... the Atlantic Charter . . . was directed to the nations of Europe whom 
we hoped to free from Nazi tyranny, and was not intended to deal with 
the internal affairs of the British Empire, or with relations between the 
United States, and, for example, the Philippines . 10 

The reference to the Philippines was intended to restrain what London 
considered American overexuberance by bringing home to America’s 
leaders what they stood to lose if they pressed their arguments too far. 
Yet it ended up missing its mark because America was in fact practicing 
what it preached, having already decided to grant independence to its 
only colony as soon as the war ended. 


401 



Diplomacy 


The Anglo-American debate over colonialism would not end. In a 1942 
Memorial Day address, Roosevelt’s friend and confidant Undersecretary 
of State Sumner Welles reiterated America’s historic opposition to colo- 
nialism: 


If this war is in fact a war for the liberation of peoples it must assure 
the sovereign equality of peoples throughout the world, as well as in 
the world of the Americas. Our victory must bring in its train the 
liberation of all peoples The age of imperialism is ended. 11 


Roosevelt subsequently sent a note to Secretary of State Hull, informing 
him that Welles’ statement was authoritative — the sort of gesture which 
does not exactly strengthen the bonds of affection between a secretary of 
state and his deputy because it implies that the deputy has the closer 
relationship with the president. Hull eventually succeeded in having 
Welles dismissed. 

Roosevelt’s views on colonialism were prescient. 12 He wanted America 
to take the lead in the inevitable liberation of colonial areas lest the quest 
for self-determination turn into a racial struggle — as Roosevelt confided 
to his adviser, Charles Taussig: 


The President said he was concerned about the brown people in the 
East. He said that there are 1,100,000,000 brown people. In many East- 
ern countries, they are ruled by a handful of whites and they resent it. 
Our goal must be to help them achieve independence — 1,100,000,000 
potential enemies are dangerous. 13 


The debate about colonialism could have no practical consequence until 
the end of the war, by which time Roosevelt would no longer be alive. 
But the controversy over strategy had immediate implications, reflecting 
widely differing national concepts of war and peace. Where American 
leaders tended to believe that military victory was an end in itself, their 
British counterparts sought to relate military operations to a precise dip- 
lomatic plan for the postwar world. 

America’s most significant military experiences had been its own Civil 
War, which had been fought to the finish, and the First World War. Both 
of which had ended in total victory. In American thinking foreign policy 
and strategy were compartmentalized into successive phases of national 
policy. In the ideal American universe, diplomats stayed out of strategy, 


402 



Three Approaches to Peace 


and military personnel completed their task by the time diplomacy started 
— a view for which America was to pay dearly in the Korean and Vietnam 
wars. 

By contrast, for Churchill, war strategy and foreign policy were closely 
linked. Since Great Britain's resources were far more limited than those 
of the United States, its strategists had always been obliged to focus on 
means as much as ends. And, having been nearly bled white by the First 
World War, British leaders were determined to avoid another similar 
carnage. Any strategy which held the promise of minimizing casualties 
appealed to them. 

Almost as soon as America had entered the war, Churchill therefore 
proposed an attack on what he called the soft underbelly of the Axis in 
Southern Europe. At the end of the war, insistently though in vain, he 
urged Eisenhower to capture Berlin, Prague, and Vienna ahead of the 
Soviet armies. To Churchill, the attractiveness of these targets was neither 
the vulnerability of the Balkans (which are, in fact, extremely difficult 
terrain) nor the military potential of the Central European capitals, but 
their utility in limiting postwar Soviet influence. 

America's military leaders reacted to Churchills recommendations 
with impatience bordering on outrage. Viewing the soft-underbelly strat- 
egy as another example of the British proclivity to enlist America in 
national British pursuits, they dismissed it on the ground that they would 
not risk lives for such secondary objectives. From the onset of joint plan- 
ning, the American commanders were eager to open a second front in 
France. Indifferent as to the location of the front lines as long as the war 
ended in total victory, they argued that only in this manner could the 
main force of the German army be brought to battle. By March 1942, 
General George Marshall, the United States Army Chief of Staff, infuriated 
at British resistance to his plans for a second front, threatened to reverse 
the so-called ABC-1 decision of a year earlier, which had given priority to 
the European theater, and to switch the main American effort to the 
Pacific. 

Roosevelt now showed that he was as strong a leader in wartime as he 
had been in guiding his country into the war. Overriding Marshall, Roose- 
velt reminded the quarreling generals that the initial decision to give 
priority to the defeat of Germany had been made in the common interest, 
not as a favor to Great Britain: 

It is of the utmost importance that we appreciate that defeat of Japan 

does not defeat Germany and that American concentration against Japan 

this year or in 1943 increases the chance of complete German domina- 


403 



Diplomacy 


tion of Europe and Africa Defeat of Germany means the defeat of 

Japan, probably without bring a shot or losing a life . 14 

Roosevelt went along with much of Churchill’s strategy 7 but drew the line 
at a landing in the Balkans. Roosevelt supported the landing in North 
Africa in November 1942 and, after the conquest of the northern shore of 
the Mediterranean, a landing in Italy in the spring of 1943, which knocked 
Italy out of the war. The second front in Normandy did not come about 
until June 1944, by which time Germany was so weakened that Allied 
casualties were greatly reduced and a decisive victory was within reach. 

Stalin was as passionate an advocate of the second front as were Ameri- 
can military leaders, but his motives were geopolitical rather than mili- 
tary. In 1941, he was no doubt eager to draw German forces away from 
the Russian front. In fact, he was so desperate for military assistance that 
he invited Great Britain to send an expeditionary force to the Caucasus. 15 
In 1942, during the German advance into southern Russia, he continued 
to press insistently for a second front, though he no longer mentioned an 
Allied expeditionary force. 

Stalin’s clamor for a second front continued even after the battle of 
Stalingrad, in late 1942, had signaled that the tide was turning against 
Germany. What Stalin found so attractive about a second front was, above 
all, its distance from Eastern and Central Europe and the Balkans, where 
Western and Soviet interests were most likely to clash. And it also guaran- 
teed that the capitalists would not escape undamaged from the war. Char- 
acteristically, Stalin, even while he insisted on having a voice in Allied 
planning in the West, denied the democracies the slightest access to 
Soviet planning or any more than the barest minimum knowledge of 
Soviet military dispositions. 

As it turned out, the Allies drew as many German divisions into Italy — 
some thirty-three — as Stalin had requested in his demands for a second 
front in France (he kept asking for between thirty and forty). 16 Still, Stalin 
accelerated his protests against the Southern strategy. From his point of 
view, its primary flaw was its geographic proximity to countries which 
were the object of Soviet ambitions. Stalin pressed for a second front in 
1942 and 1943 for the same reason that Churchill sought to delay it: 
because it would draw the Allies away from the politically disputed 
areas. 

In the debate about the origin of the Cold War, it came to be argued 
by some distinguished critics that the failure to open a second front 
earlier had caused Stalin’s intransigence in Eastern Europe. According to 
this line of reasoning, the delay in opening a second front aroused Soviet 


404 



Three Approaches to Peace 


anger and cynicism far more than any other factor. 17 It defies credulity, 
however, that the old Bolshevik, fresh from a pact with Hitler and a 
negotiation to divide the world with the Nazi leader, could be “disillu- 
sioned” by Realpolitik — if indeed that is what the Allied policy was. It is 
difficult to imagine the organizer of the purge trials and of the Katyn 
massacres driven to cynicism by a strategic decision to relate military to 
political objectives. He played the second front gambit as he did every- 
thing else — coldly, calculatingly, and realistically. 

The Joint Chiefs of Staff were in any event merely reflecting the convic- 
tion of America’s political leadership, which was to postpone any discus- 
sions of the postwar world until after victory had been achieved. This was 
the fateful decision that shaped the postwar world and made the Cold 
War inevitable. 

As a general rule, countries striving for stability and equilibrium should 
do everything within their power to achieve their basic peace terms while 
still at war. As long as the enemy is in the field, his strength indirectly 
enhances that of the more peaceful side. If this principle is neglected and 
the key issues are left unresolved until the peace conference, the most 
determined power ends up in possession of the prizes and can be dis- 
lodged only by a major confrontation. 

An Allied agreement on postwar aims, or at least a discussion of them, 
was especially necessary during World War II because of the policy of 
unconditional surrender promulgated by Roosevelt and Churchill at Casa- 
blanca in January 1943. Roosevelt had proposed the policy for a variety of 
reasons. He feared that a discussion of peace terms with Germany might 
prove divisive, and he wanted to focus all of the Allies’ energy on winning 
the war. He was also eager to reassure Stalin, who was then in the throes 
of the battle of Stalingrad, that there would be no separate peace. But 
above all, Roosevelt wanted to prevent another round of German revi- 
sionist claims later on about how Germany had been tricked into ending 
the war by unfulfilled promises. 

Yet Roosevelt’s refusal to discuss the shape of the postwar world while 
the war was in progress threw America’s vast influence behind an out- 
come which lacked such crucial elements as a balance of power or any 
criteria for political solutions. In all matters to which the Wilsonian as- 
sumptions of an underlying harmony were relevant, Roosevelt played the 
major role in shaping the postwar world. Under his aegis, a series of 
international conferences elaborated blueprints for the cooperative com- 
ponents of the postwar world order: for what became the United Nations 
(at Dumbarton Oaks), for world finance (at Bretton Woods), for food and 
agriculture (at Hot Springs), for relief and rehabilitation (in Washington), 


405 



Diplomacy 


and for civil aviation (in Chicago). 18 But he was adamant in his refusal to 
discuss war aims, or to risk disagreement with the Soviets on that subject. 

At first, Stalin treated Roosevelt s evasion of a discussion of the postwar 
settlement on the geopolitical level as a tactical maneuver designed to 
exploit his military difficulties. For him, the war had been about creating 
a new and more favorable balance of power out of the vacuum left by the 
imminent disintegration of the Axis. Far too traditional to expect the West 
to leave the final peace terms to the outcome of military operations, Stalin 
had tried to involve Eden in December 1941 in a postwar settlement even 
as German troops were advancing toward the suburbs of Moscow. Stalin’s 
introductory remarks on that occasion made it clear that he was not 
talking about the Atlantic Charter. Declarations of principle, he said, were 
like algebra; he preferred practical arithmetic. Stalin did not want to 
waste time on abstractions, and preferred to trade reciprocal concessions, 
hopefully in the form of territory. 

What Stalin had in mind was plain, old-fashioned Realpolitik. Germany 
should be dismembered, and Poland moved west. The Soviet Union 
would return to the borders of 1941, meaning specifically the Curzon 
Line with Poland and the retention of the Baltic states — a clear violation 
of the principle of self-determination as proclaimed in the Atlantic Char- 
ter. In return, the Soviet Union would support any demand Great Britain 
might choose to make for bases in France, Belgium, the Netherlands, 
Norway, and Denmark 19 — all of them British allies. Stalin viewed the 
situation as any eighteenth-century prince would have: to the victor be- 
long the spoils. 

On the other hand, Stalin was not yet making any demands about the 
political future of the Eastern European countries, and he indicated some 
unspecified flexibility about the frontier with Poland. Nevertheless, Great 
Britain could not totally violate the Atlantic Charter only three months 
after its proclamation. And America’s leaders would not so much as con- 
sider what seemed to them a return to the secret arrangements that had 
blighted the diplomacy of the First World War. Even so, the terms offered 
by Stalin, however brutal, were better than what finally emerged from the 
war — and they probably could have been improved by negotiation. Eden 
avoided a deadlock by promising to report on his conversations with 
Stalin to Churchill and Roosevelt, and to continue the dialogue after- 
ward. 

Despite the extremity of his military situation — and perhaps because 
of it — Stalin returned to the subject in the spring of 1942. Churchill was 
quite prepared to explore a Soviet quid pro quo for recognition of the 
1941 frontiers. But Roosevelt and his advisers, bent on avoiding any sem- 


406 



Three Approaches to Peace 


blance of balance-of-power arrangements, rejected a discussion of post- 
war issues. Hull wrote to Churchill on behalf of Roosevelt: 

... it would be a doubtful course to abandon our broad basic declara- 
tions of policy, principles, and practice. If these are departed from in 
one or two important instances, such as you propose, then neither of 
the two countries parties to such an act will have any precedent to stand 
on, or any stable rules by which to be governed and to insist that other 
Governments be governed. 20 

Stalin next tried to bring matters to a head by sending Molotov to London 
in May 1942. In the preparatory discussions for that visit in April 1942, the 
Soviet Ambassador, Ivan Maisky, raised Stalin’s terms of four months 
earlier. 21 The Soviet Union now demanded pacts of mutual assistance 
with Romania and Finland for the postwar period. Considering that Ger- 
man armies were still deep inside the Soviet Union, this came as another 
extraordinary expression of Stalin’s long-range goals — though, it must be 
noted, it still fell far short, both in terms of reach and of substance, of the 
satellite orbit which emerged at the end of the war in the absence of an 
agreement. 

Churchill encountered violent opposition from Washington to pursu- 
ing these conversations. Hull described the Anglo-Soviet exchanges as 
contrary to the Atlantic Charter, as a defiance of America’s historic opposi- 
tion to territorial changes by force, and as a throwback to the power 
politics of a discredited past. 22 Roosevelt weighed in with Stalin along 
much the same lines. Stalin replied with a curt note acknowledging re- 
ceipt of Roosevelt’s message but without commenting on it, a clear signal 
that it had not been favorably received. In a note sent simultaneously to 
Churchill, Stalin urged him to ignore “American interference.” 23 

Early in the war, Stalin was clearly eager for an arrangement on the 
1941 frontiers; and he was much too cynical not to have expected a 
request for some kind of quid pro quo. Nothing is more futile than 
historical might-have-beens; the price Stalin was willing to pay will never 
be known because Roosevelt cut short the Anglo-Soviet dialogue by invit- 
ing Molotov to Washington. 

On the occasion of Eden’s visit to Moscow in December 1941, Stalin 
had indicated his flexibility on the issue of Poland’s borders by calling it 
an “open question.” 24 With 20/20 historical hindsight, Stalin might have 
been willing to trade the recognition of the 1941 borders for his accep- 
tance of the Eastern European governments-in-exile (which he had not 
yet challenged) with a caveat for the Baltic States to return to their 1940 


407 



Diplomacy 


independent status and permit Soviet bases on their territory. This might 
then have led to an outcome for Eastern Europe on the Finnish model — 
respectful of Soviet security but also democratic and free to conduct a 
nonaligned foreign policy. It would surely have been better for the well- 
being of the peoples of Eastern Europe than what transpired and, in the 
end, even for the Soviet Union. 

All such prospects vanished as soon as Molotov reached Washington at 
the end of May 1942 and learned that America was asking the Soviet 
Union not for a political arrangement but for an agreement to a new 
approach to world order. Roosevelt presented Molotov with the American 
alternative to Stalin’s (and Churchill’s) ideas on spheres of influence. 
Quite simply, the formula was a return to Wilson’s concept of collective 
security as modified by the idea of the Four Policemen. Such an arrange- 
ment, argued Roosevelt, would provide the Soviet Union with better 
security than the traditional balance of power. 25 

Why Roosevelt believed that Stalin, who had made such Machiavellian 
proposals to Churchill, would find world government attractive is not 
clear. Perhaps he thought that, if worse came to worst and Stalin insisted 
on keeping the territory his armies had conquered, it would be easier 
domestically to acquiesce to a fait accompli than to agree to Stalin’s 
demands while the military outcome was still uncertain. 

Roosevelt was more specific regarding the colonial issue. He proposed 
an international trusteeship for all former colonies which “ought for our 
own safety to be taken away from weak nations” (a category in which he 
included France). 26 And he invited the Soviet Union to become a founding 
member of the Trusteeship Council. 

Had Molotov been more of a philosopher, he might have reflected on 
the circularity of history by which, in the space of eighteen months, he 
had been offered membership in two different, opposing, alliances: by 
Hitler and Ribbentrop in a tripartite pact consisting of Germany, Italy, and 
Japan; and by Roosevelt in a coalition including the United States, Great 
Britain, and China. In each case, the suitor had tried to woo Molotov with 
the prospect of exotic lands to the south: Berlin had offered the Middle 
East; Washington, colonial trusteeships. In neither case would Molotov 
permit himself to be deflected from his single-minded pursuit of immedi- 
ate Soviet objectives within the reach of Soviet armies. 

Nor did Molotov see any need to adjust his tactics to the interlocutor at 
hand. In Washington, as he had done earlier in Berlin, Molotov agreed in 
principle to join the proposed arrangement. That the Four Policemen 
would have placed him in the company of the sworn enemies of the 
grouping whose offer he had likewise entertained eighteen months ear- 


408 



Three Approaches to Peace 


lier did not seem to disturb him. Nor, as in Berlin, did Molotovs 
agreement in principle imply any cause for him to abandon Stalin’s terri- 
torial ambitions in Europe. In Washington, as in Berlin, Molotov was 
adamant about the 1941 borders, about demanding a dominant Soviet 
influence in Bulgaria, Romania, and Finland, and special rights in the 
Straits. On both occasions, he deferred the colonial issue to a later date. 

In all probability, Stalin could hardly believe his good fortune when 
Molotov informed him of Washington’s refusal to discuss a political settle- 
ment while the war was in progress. For this meant that he needed to 
make no concessions as long as the German army was still in the field. 
Significantly, once Stalin understood that America was deferring a politi- 
cal settlement into the postwar period, he abandoned his usual persistent, 
hectoring style and never raised the subject again. With his bargaining 
position improving at each step closer to an Allied victory, Stalin stood to 
gain the most by delaying political discussions and by seizing as much 
booty as he could, if only to use these gains as bargaining chips at a peace 
conference. Nobody was more conscious than Stalin of the old adage that 
possession is nine-tenths of the law. 

Roosevelt’s reluctance to jeopardize postwar cooperation with the So- 
viet Union by prematurely discussing war aims may have had a strategic 
as well as a Wilsonian rationale. Roosevelt may have been aware of the 
possibility of Soviet postwar expansionism but may have felt trapped 
between his people’s convictions and the looming strategic peril. To 
maintain the war effort, Roosevelt above all needed to appeal to American 
ideals, which deplored spheres of influence and the balance of power. It 
was, after all, only a few years since the Congress had enthusiastically 
passed the Neutrality Acts, and the ideas underlying them had not disap- 
peared. Roosevelt may have concluded that, whatever the Soviet inten- 
tions, his optimum strategy was to give Stalin a reputation to uphold. For 
only against such a backdrop would he have a chance to mobilize America 
to resist Soviet expansionism if it really came to pass. 

This is the view of Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., who has argued that Roose- 
velt had prepared a fail-back position in case Soviet-American relations 
went sour: “a great army, a network of overseas bases, plans for peacetime 
universal military training and the Anglo-American monopoly of the 
atomic bomb.” 27 

True, Roosevelt had all of these means at his disposal. But his motiva- 
tion in assembling them was to spruce up the war effort rather than as a 
hedge against Soviet expansionism. The bases had been acquired to make 
possible the transfer of destroyers to Great Britain; the atom bomb was 
aimed at the Nazis and Japan; and all indications are that Roosevelt would 


409 



Diplomacy 


have demobilized the army rapidly and brought it home — indeed, he 
said so on many occasions. No doubt, once Roosevelt had become con- 
vinced of Stalin’s bad faith he would have become a skillful and deter- 
mined opponent of Soviet expansionism and would have had at his 
disposal the tools described. There is little evidence, however, that he 
had ever reached that judgment or viewed his military capabilities in 
terms of a possible confrontation with the Soviet Union. 

As the war drew T to a close, Roosevelt did express irritation with Stalin’s 
tactics. Yet, throughout the war, Roosevelt had remained remarkably con- 
sistent, even eloquent, in his commitment to Soviet-American coopera- 
tion, and he considered no assignment more important than overcoming 
Stalin’s distrust. Walter Lippmann may have been right when he said of 
Roosevelt, “He distrusted everybody. What he thought he could do was 
to outwit Stalin, which is quite a different thing.” 28 If that was his inten- 
tion, he did not succeed. 

Roosevelt relied on personal relations with Stalin in a way that 
Churchill never would. When Hitler invaded the Soviet Union, Churchill 
explained Great Britain’s decision to support Stalin with a phrase which 
involved neither personal nor moral endorsement: “If Hitler invaded 
Hell, he [Churchill] would at least make a favourable reference to the 
Devil!” 29 Roosevelt showed no such reserve. Shortly after America’s entry 
into the war, he attempted to arrange a meeting with Stalin at the Bering 
Straits to the exclusion of Churchill. It was to be “an informal and com- 
pletely simple visit for a few days between you and me” to achieve “a 
meeting of minds.” Roosevelt would bring only Harry Hopkins, an inter- 
preter, and a stenographer; the seals and the gulls would be their wit- 
nesses. 30 

The Bering Straits meeting never took place. But two summits did 
occur — at Teheran from November 28 to December 1, 1943, and at Yalta 
from February 7 4 to 11, 1945. On both occasions, Stalin went to great 
lengths to demonstrate to Roosevelt and Churchill that they needed the 
meeting much more than he did; even the settings were designed to 
reduce the Anglo-Americans’ confidence in their ability to extract conces- 
sions from him. Teheran was only a few hundred miles from the Soviet 
border, and Yalta, of course, was on Soviet territory. In each case, the 
Western leaders had to travel thousands of miles, an especially arduous 
imposition on a man of Roosevelt’s handicaps even at the time of the 
Teheran meeting. By the time of Yalta, the President was mortally ill. 

Yalta has borne the opprobrium for the shape of the postwar world. 
Yet, when it occurred, Soviet armies had already crossed all their 1941 
borders and were in a position to impose unilaterally Soviet political 


410 



Three Approaches to Peace 


control over the rest of Eastern Europe. If a postwar settlement was ever 
to have been negotiated at any summit, the appropriate time would have 
been at Teheran, fifteen months earlier. Before then, the Soviet Union 
had been struggling to avert defeat; at the time of Teheran, the battle for 
Stalingrad had been won, victory was certain, and a separate Soviet-Nazi 
deal was highly improbable. 

In Teheran, Roosevelt had initially planned to stay at the American 
legation, some distance from the Soviet and British embassies, which 
stood back to back. There was a constant worry that, en route to a meeting 
at the Soviet or British compound, Roosevelt might fall victim to a bomb- 
throwing Axis sympathizer. Therefore, at the first plenary session, which 
was held in the American legation, Roosevelt accepted Stalin’s invitation 
to move to a villa in the Soviet compound. It was furnished according to 
the pretentious and gaudy style of Soviet interior design for high person- 
ages and, no doubt, was suitably bugged for the occasion. 

Roosevelt could have offered no stronger signal of trust and goodwill 
than to accept Stalin’s offer of Soviet lodgings. Yet the gesture left no 
significant impact on Stalin’s strategy, which was to castigate Churchill 
and Roosevelt about the delay in opening the second front. Stalin liked 
to put interlocutors on the defensive. In this instance, it had the additional 
benefit of focusing attention on a region far from the areas that would 
soon be in contention. He elicited a formal promise to open a second 
front in France by the spring of 1944. The three Allies also agreed on the 
complete demilitarization of Germany and on their respective occupation 
zones. On one occasion, when Stalin urged the execution of 50,000 Ger- 
man officers, Churchill walked out and returned only after Stalin had 
followed him to give his assurances that he had been jesting — which, in 
light of what we now know of the Katyn massacre of Polish officers, was 
probably not true. 31 Then, at a private meeting, Roosevelt outlined his 
idea of the Four Policemen to a skeptical Stalin. 

All of these issues delayed discussion of postwar arrangements, which 
was left until the last day of the Conference. Roosevelt agreed to Stalin’s 
plan to move the frontiers of Poland westward and indicated that he 
would not press Stalin on the question of the Baltics. If Soviet armies 
occupied the Baltic States, he said, neither the United States nor Great 
Britain would “turn her out” — though he also recommended holding a 
plebiscite. The fact was, Roosevelt was as reluctant to undertake a full- 
scale discussion of the postwar world as he had been when Molotov 
visited Washington eighteen months earlier. He therefore put forward his 
comments on Stalin’s postwar plans for Eastern Europe so tentatively as 
to sound almost apologetic. Roosevelt called Stalin’s attention to the 6 



Diplomacy 


million American voters of Polish extraction who were in a position to 
influence his re-election in the coming year. Though “personally he 
agreed with the views of Marshal Stalin as to the necessity of the restora- 
tion of a Polish state [he] would like to see the Eastern border moved 
farther to the west and the Western border moved even to the River Oder. 
He hoped, however, that the Marshal would understand that for political 
reasons outlined above, he could not participate in any decision here in 
Teheran or even next winter on this subject and that he could not publicly 
take part in any such arrangement at the present time . ” 32 This could hardly 
have conveyed to Stalin that he was running a great risk by proceeding 
unilaterally; indeed, it implied that America’s agreement after the election 
was largely a formality. 

The reason Roosevelt was putting forward American political goals so 
halfheartedly was that he viewed his principal objective at Teheran as 
establishing the concept of the Four Policemen. One of the methods 
he used to attempt to gain Stalin’s confidence was to dissociate himself 
ostentatiously from Churchill, as he reported to Frances Perkins, an old 
friend and his Secretary of Labor: 

Winston got red and scowled, and the more he did so, the more Stalin 
smiled. Finally, Stalin broke out into a deep, hearty guffaw, and for the 
first time in three days I saw light. I kept it up until Stalin was laughing 
with me, and it was then that I called him “Uncle Joe.” He would have 
thought me fresh the day before, but that day he laughed and came 
over and shook my hand. 

From that time on our relations were personal The ice was bro- 

ken and we talked like men and brothers. 33 

The reinvention of Stalin, organizer of purges and recent collaborator of 
Hitler, into “Uncle Joe,” the paragon of moderation, was surely the ulti- 
mate triumph of hope over experience. Yet Roosevelt’s emphasis on 
Stalin’s goodwill w^as not a personal idiosyncrasy, but vented the attitude 
of a people with more faith in the inherent goodness of man than in 
geopolitical analysis. They preferred to see Stalin as an avuncular friend 
rather than as a totalitarian dictator. In May 1943, Stalin disbanded the 
Comintern, the Communist Party’s formal instrument of world revolution. 
It came at a moment in time when world revolution could hardly have 
been either a top Soviet priority or a serious capability. Yet Senator 
Tom Connally of Texas, a key member of the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee and soon to be its chairman, greeted Stalin’s move as a funda- 
mental turn toward Western values: “Russians for years have been chang- 


412 



Three Approaches to Peace 


ing their economy and approaching the abandonment of Communism, 
and the whole Western world will be gratified at the happy climax of 
their efforts.” 34 Even Fortune magazine, a bastion of American capitalism, 
wrote in a similar vein. 35 

At the end of the Teheran Conference, therefore, the American people 
saw nothing unusual in their president’s summing up its achievements 
through a personal evaluation of the Soviet dictator: 

I may say that I “got along fine” with Marshal Stalin. He is a man who 
combines a tremendous, relentless determination with a stalwart good 
humor. I believe he is truly representative of the heart and soul of 
Russia; and I believe that we are going to get along very well with him 
and the Russian people — very well indeed. 36 

When, in June 1944, the Allies landed in Normandy and advanced from 
the west, Germany’s doom was sealed. As the military situation turned 
irrevocably in his favor, Stalin progressively raised his terms. In 1941, he 
had asked for acceptance of the 1941 borders (with a possibility of modi- 
fying them), and indicated a willingness to recognize the London-based 
free Poles. In 1942, he began to complain about the composition of the 
Polish government-in-exile. In 1943, he created an alternative to it in the 
so-called free Lublin Committee. By late 1944, he had recognized the 
Lublin group — dominated by communists — as the provisional govern- 
ment, and banned the London Poles. In 1941, Stalin’s primary issue had 
been frontiers; by 1945, it had become political control of territories 
beyond those frontiers. 

Churchill understood what was taking place. But Great Britain had 
become too dependent on the United States to sustain solitary initiatives. 
Nor was Great Britain strong enough to oppose by itself Stalin’s increas- 
ingly bold creation of a Soviet sphere in Eastern Europe. In October 1944, 
Churchill undertook an almost quixotic enterprise to settle the future of 
Eastern Europe directly with Stalin. During a visit to Moscow which lasted 
eight days, Churchill jotted down a spheres-of-influence arrangement and 
handed it to Stalin. In it, he envisaged a delineation of spheres in terms 
of percentages, with Great Britain obtaining 90 percent in Greece, and 
the Soviet Union 90 percent in Romania and 75 percent in Bulgaria; 
Hungary and Yugoslavia were divided according to a 50-50 basis. Stalin 
accepted on the spot — though Molotov, in the best Soviet tradition of 
horse trading, sought in a dialogue with Eden to shave the British percent- 
ages, giving the Soviets a greater edge in every East European country 
except Hungary 37 


413 



Diplomacy 


The British effort had a certain pathos about it. Never before had 
spheres of influence been defined by percentages. No criteria to measure 
compliance existed, or any means of enforcement. Influence would be 
defined by the presence of the contending armies. In this manner, Greece 
fell into the British sphere, with or without the agreement, while all the 
other states — except Yugoslavia — became Soviet satellites regardless of 
the percentages assigned to them. Even Yugoslavia’s freedom of action 
resulted not from the Churchill-Stalin agreement but from the fact that it 
had been under Soviet occupation for only a very brief period and had 
liberated itself from German military 7 occupation through a major guer- 
rilla effort of its own. 

By the time of the Yalta Conference in February 1945, nothing re- 
mained of the Churchill-Stalin agreement. The Soviet army was already 
in possession of all the disputed territories, making the frontiers issue 
largely moot. Moreover, it was intervening massively in the internal ar- 
rangements of all the occupied countries. 

Already in severely failing health, Roosevelt had to fly from Malta to a 
snowy airport in Saki, in the Crimea, and from there was driven the ninety 
miles to Yalta in some five hours over difficult, snow-covered roads. His 
quarters were a three-room suite in the Livadia Palace. (In the nineteenth 
century, Livadia had been a favorite winter resort of the tsars: in 1877 , 
Alexander II had planned his Balkan invasion from there; in 1911 , Tsar 
Nicholas II had built a white granite palace on the bluffs overlooking the 
Black Sea, which became the site of the Conference of the Big Three.) 

The tactics of the participants did not change with the new surround- 
ings. Churchill was anxious to discuss postwar political arrangements but 
was overruled by his two colleagues, each of whom pursued his own 
distinct agenda. Roosevelt sought an agreement on voting procedures for 
the United Nations, and to nail down Soviet participation in the war 
against Japan. Stalin was happy enough to discuss both subjects, because 
the time spent on them would not be available for a discussion of Eastern 
Europe, and because he was eager (not reluctant, as some Americans 
thought ) to enter the war against Japan, which would make it possible for 
him to share in the spoils of that victory as well. 

Churchill was above all concerned with the European balance of 
power. He wanted to restore France to Great Power status, to resist the 
dismemberment of Germany, and to reduce exorbitant Soviet demands 
for reparations. Though Churchill was successful with respect to all three 
issues, they were essentially sideshows to the settlement of Eastern Eu- 
rope — which was even then being foreclosed daily by the behavior of 
the Red Army. By this time, Stalin had prepared a riposte to Roosevelt’s 


414 



Three Approaches to Peace 


ploy that the Soviet Union should make concessions in order to spare 
him the wrath of his domestic opposition: when Roosevelt asked that the 
city of Lvov remain with Poland in order to pacify his domestic Polish 
critics, Stalin replied that, much as he would like to oblige, his own 
Ukrainian population would create an insuperable domestic problem for 
him. 38 

In the end, Churchill and Roosevelt accepted Russia’s 1941 borders, a 
painful step for Churchill, whose country had gone to war to preserve 
Poland’s territorial integrity. They agreed as well that Poland’s western 
frontier would be moved toward the Oder and Neisse rivers. Since there 
were two Neisse rivers, the final delineation was left unresolved. 
Churchill and Roosevelt accepted the Moscow-created Lublin government 
with the proviso that it be broadened to include some democratic politi- 
cal figures from the London-based Polish government-in-exile. 

Stalin’s concession to his allies was a Joint Declaration on Liberated 
Europe, which promised free elections and the establishment of demo- 
cratic governments in Eastern Europe. Stalin obviously thought that he 
was promising the Soviet version of free elections, especially since the 
Red Army would have already occupied the countries in question. This 
is in fact what happened, though Stalin vastly underestimated the 
seriousness with which Americans have traditionally approached legal 
documents. Later, when it decided to organize resistance to Soviet expan- 
sionism, America did so on the basis of Stalin’s failure to keep his word 
— as given at Yalta and as the American leaders and public had under- 
stood it. 

Stalin’s reaction to Roosevelt’s appeal to join the war against Japan 
illustrated how different his rules of the coalition game were from Roose- 
velt’s. In a discussion from which Churchill was excluded — even though 
Great Britain had been an early victim of Japanese aggression — nothing 
was heard of Allied unity as its own reward or of avoiding political issues 
so as to create favorable preconditions for the Four Policemen. Stalin felt 
not the least bit inhibited about insisting on special benefits while the 
war was still going on, and on being paid in strategic, not emotional, coin. 
The quid pro quo he demanded was unabashedly resurrected from the 
days of the tsars. 

Stalin’s claim to the southern part of Sakhalin Island and to the Kurile 
Islands did bear a certain, albeit vague, relationship to Soviet security and 
Russian history. But his demand for free ports in Darien and Port Arthur 
and the right to manage the Manchurian railways was straight out of tsarist 
imperialist textbooks from the turn of the century. In Roosevelt’s least 
comprehensible decision at Yalta, he granted these demands in a secret 


415 



Diplomacy 


agreement which amounted to returning to Moscow the predominant 
role in Manchuria that it had lost in the Russo-Japanese War — one it was 
not to lose until the Chinese communists took over Beijing in 1949. 

After the Yalta Conference, all was jubilation. In reporting to the Con- 
gress, Roosevelt emphasized the agreement reached on the United Na- 
tions but not the decision regarding the political future of either Europe 
or Asia. For the second time in a generation, an American president 
was returning from Europe to proclaim the end of history. “The Yalta 
Conference,” affirmed Roosevelt, 

. . . ought to spell the end of the system of unilateral action, the exclu- 
sive alliances, the spheres of influence, the balances of power, and all 
the other expedients that have been tried for centuries — and have 
always failed. We propose to substitute for all these, a universal organi- 
zation in which all peace-loving Nations will finally have a chance to 
join. I am confident that the Congress and the American people will 
accept the results of this Conference as the beginnings of a permanent 
structure of peace. 39 

In other words, Roosevelt had granted Stalin a sphere of influence in 
northern China to encourage him to participate in a world order that 
would make spheres of influence irrelevant. 

When the Yalta Conference ended, only the unity of the wartime alli- 
ance was being celebrated; the fissures that would later undo it were not 
yet widely perceived. Hope still reigned supreme and “Uncle Joe” was 
viewed as an uncomplicated partner. Reflecting on Yalta, Harry Hopkins 
expressed his concern that Stalin, the presumed moderate, might buckle 
under pressure from hard-liners in the Kremlin: 

The Russians had proved that they could be reasonable and farseeing 
and there wasn’t any doubt in the minds of the President or any of us 
that we could live with them and get along with them peacefully for as 
far into the future as any of us could imagine. But I have to make one 
amendment to that— I think we all had in our minds the reservation 
that we could not foretell what the results would be if anything should 
happen to Stalin. We felt sure that we could count on him to be reason- 
able and sensible and understanding — but we never could be sure who 
or what might be in back of him there in the Kremlin. 40 

The theme that the incumbent in the Kremlin was in his heart of hearts a 
peaceful moderate in need of help in overcoming his intransigent col- 
leagues was to remain a constant of American discussions ever after, 


416 



Three Approaches to Peace 


regardless of the Soviet leader. Indeed, these assessments survived even 
into the postcommunist period, when they were applied, first to Mikhail 
Gorbachev, and then to Boris Yeltsin. 

The importance of personal relations among leaders and of the exis- 
tence of an underlying harmony among nations continued to be affirmed 
by America as the war drew to a conclusion. On January 20, 1945, in his 
fourth inaugural address, Roosevelt described his approach by quoting 
from Emerson: “ . . the only way to have a friend is to be one.” 41 Soon 
after Yalta, Roosevelt characterized Stalin to the Cabinet as “having some- 
thing else in him besides this revolutionist Bolshevist thing.” He ascribed 
that special quality to Stalin’s early education for the priesthood: “I think 
that something entered into his nature of the way in which a Christian 
gentleman should behave.” 42 

Stalin, however, was a master practitioner of Realpolitik, not a Christian 
gentleman. As the Soviet armies advanced, Stalin was implementing what 
he had privately told Milovan Djilas, then a Yugoslav communist leader: 

This war is not as in the past; whoever occupies a territory also imposes 
on it his own social system. Everyone imposes his own system as far as 
his army can reach. It cannot be otherwise. 43 

Stalin’s rules of the game were demonstrated dramatically in the final 
stages of the war. In April 1945, Churchill pressed Eisenhower, as Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the Allied forces, to seize Berlin, Prague, and Vienna 
ahead of the advancing Soviet armies. The .American chiefs of staff would 
not consider the request, using it as a final opportunity to teach their 
British ally the need for military planning unaffected by political consider- 
ations: “Such psychological and political advantages as would result from 
the possible capture of Berlin ahead of the Russians should not override 
the imperative military consideration, which in our opinion is the de- 
struction and dismemberment of the German armed forces.” 44 

Since there was no significant German armed forces left either to dis- 
member or to destroy, rejecting Churchill’s appeal was clearly a matter 
of principle for the .American chiefs of staff. Indeed, the chiefs felt so 
strongly about their view that General Eisenhower took it upon himself 
to write directly to Stalin on March 28, 1945, to inform him that he would 
not advance on Berlin, and to propose that American and Soviet troops 
meet near Dresden. 

No doubt astonished that a general would address a head of state on 
any subject, let alone a matter of such political importance, Stalin was 
also not in the habit of turning down free political gifts. On April 1, 


417 



Diplomacy 


he replied to Eisenhower that he agreed with his assessment; he, too, 
considered Berlin of secondary strategic interest and would devote only 
minor Soviet forces to capture it. He also agreed to a link-up along the 
Elbe, in the general area of Dresden. Having been handed the prize, 
Stalin proceeded to show that he, at least, had his political priorities 
straight. Contravening his assurances to Eisenhower, he ordered the main 
thrust of the Soviet ground offensive to be aimed at Berlin, giving Mar- 
shals Zhukov and Koniev two weeks to launch an attack he had told 
Eisenhower would not take place until the second half of May . 45 

By April 1945, two months after Yalta, Stalin s violations of the Yalta 
Declaration on Liberated Europe had become flagrant, especially with 
respect to Poland. Churchill was reduced to sending a plaintive letter in 
w T hich he appealed to “my friend Stalin.” Accepting Stalins proposition 
that no individuals hostile to the Soviet Union should serve in the new 
Polish government, Churchill pleaded for the inclusion of some of the 
members of the Polish government-in-exile in London who met his test. 
By this time, the mere lack of hostile sentiments was no longer enough 
for Stalin; only a totally friendly government would do. On May 5, 1945, 
Stalin replied: 

... we cannot be satisfied that persons should be associated with the 
formation of the future Polish Government who, as you express it, “are 
not fundamentally anti-Soviet,” or that only those persons should be 
excluded from participation in this work who are in your opinion 
“extremely unfriendly towards Russia.” Neither of these criteria can 
satisfy us. We insist, and shall insist, that there should be brought into 
consultation on the formation of the future Polish Government only 
those persons who have actively shown a friendly attitude towards the 
Soviet Union and who are honestly and sincerely prepared to co-oper- 
ate with the Soviet State . 46 

The adjectives “active” and “friendly” w r ere, of course, applicable only to 
members of the Polish Communist Party and, from among these, only to 
those Party members totally subservient to Moscow. Four years later, even 
lifelong communists suspected of national feelings would be purged. 

But was an alternative strategy feasible? Or were the democracies doing 
the best they could, given the geographic and military realities that ex- 
isted at the time? These are haunting questions, because, in retrospect, 
everything that happened seems inevitable. The longer the interval, the 
more difficult it becomes to imagine an alternative outcome or to prove 
its viability. And history refuses to be played back like a movie reel in 
which new endings are spliced in at will. 


418 



Three Approaches to Peace 


Restoration of the 1941 Soviet frontiers was nearly impossible to pre- 
vent, A more dynamic Western policy might have achieved certain modi- 
fications, even the return of some form of independence to the Baltic 
States, perhaps linked to the Soviet Union by treaties of mutual assistance 
and the presence of Soviet military bases. If this had ever been attainable, 
it would only have been so in 1941 or 1942, when the Soviet Union was 
teetering at the brink of catastrophe. And it was understandable that 
Roosevelt should have been loath to burden Soviet decision-makers with 
such distasteful choices at a moment when, America not yet having en- 
tered the war, the greatest fear was an imminent Soviet collapse. 

After the battle of Stalingrad, however, the issue of Eastern Europe’s 
future could have been raised without risking either a Soviet collapse or 
a separate peace with Hitler. An effort should have been made to settle 
the political structure of territories beyond the Soviet frontiers and to 
achieve for these countries a status similar to that of Finland. 

Would Stalin have made a separate peace with Hitler if the democracies 
had been more insistent? Stalin never made such a threat, though he did 
manage to create the impression that it was always a possibility. Only two 
episodes have come to light indicating that Stalin might have considered 
a separate arrangement. The first dates to the early days of the war, when 
panic was rampant. Allegedly, Stalin, Molotov, and Kaganovich asked the 
Bulgarian Ambassador to explore with Hitler the possibility of settling 
for the Baltics, Bessarabia, and slices of Belorussia and the Ukraine — in 
essence, the 1938 Soviet frontiers — but the Ambassador supposedly re- 
fused to transmit the message. 47 And Hitler surely would have refused 
such a settlement while German armies were heading toward Moscow, 
Kiev, and Leningrad, and had already gone far beyond what the “peace 
offer” — if that is what it was — suggested. The Nazi plan was to depopulate 
the Soviet Union up to the line from Archangel to Astrakhan, which was 
far beyond Moscow, and to reduce that part of its population as had 
managed to avoid extermination into slavery. 48 

The second episode is even more ambiguous. It occurred in Septem- 
ber 1943, eight months after Stalingrad and two months after the battle of 
Kursk, which wiped out most of the German offensive armor. Ribbentrop 
presented Hitler with a strange tale indeed. A Soviet deputy foreign minis- 
ter who had at one time been Ambassador to Berlin was visiting Stock- 
holm, and Ribbentrop interpreted this as an opportunity for exploratory 
talks of a separate peace along the 1941 borders. It was almost surely 
wishful thinking, because at that point Soviet armies were approaching 
the 1941 frontiers on their own. 

Hitler rejected the alleged opportunity, telling his Foreign Minister, 


419 



Diplomacy 


“You know, Ribbentrop, if I came to an agreement with Russia today I’d 
attack her again tomorrow — I just can’t help myself.” He spoke in the 
same vein to Goebbels. The timing was “totally unsuitable”; negotiations 
would have to be preceded by a decisive military victory. 49 As late as 1944, 
Hitler still believed that, after repelling the second front, he would be 
able to conquer Russia. 

Above all, a separate peace, even along the 1941 frontiers, would have 
solved nothing for either Stalin or Hitler. It would have left Stalin face to 
face with a powerful Germany and the prospect that, in another conflict, 
the democracies would abandon their treacherous partner. And it would 
have been interpreted by Hitler as advancing the Soviet armies toward 
Germany without any assurance that they would not resume the war at 
the earliest opportunity. 

Roosevelt’s concept of the Four Policemen foundered on the same 
obstacle as had Wilson’s more general concept of collective security: the 
Four Policemen simply did not perceive their global goals in the same 
way. Stalin’s lethal combination of paranoia, communist ideology, and 
Russian imperialism translated the notion of the Four Policemen impar- 
tially enforcing world peace on the basis of universally shared values into 
either a Soviet opportunity or a capitalist trap. Stalin knew that Great 
Britain by itself was no counterweight to the Soviet Union and that this 
would either create a huge vacuum in front of the Soviet Union or serve 
as the prelude to later confrontation with the United States (which, as a 
first-generation Bolshevik, Stalin was bound to consider the more likely 
result). On the basis of either hypothesis, Stalin’s course of action was 
clear: he would push Soviet power as far westward as possible, either to 
collect his spoils or to put himself into the best bargaining position for a 
diplomatic showdown later. 

For that matter, America was itself unprepared to accept the conse- 
quences of its President’s Four Policemen. If the concept were to work, 
America had to be willing to intervene wherever peace was threatened. 
Yet Roosevelt never tired of telling his fellow Allies that neither American 
troops nor American resources would be available to restore Europe, and 
that preserving the peace had to be a British and Russian task. At Yalta, he 
told his colleagues that American troops would not stay longer than two 
years in occupation duty. 50 

If that was true, the Soviet Union was bound to dominate Central 
Europe, leaving Great Britain with an insuperable quandary. On the one 
hand, it was no longer strong enough to maintain the balance of power 
against the Soviet Union all by itself. On the other hand, to the extent that 
Great Britain would attempt some sort of solitary initiative, it was likely 
to encounter traditional American objections. For example, in January 


420 



Three Approaches to Peace 


1945, The New York Times reported a secret communication from Roose- 
velt to Churchill on the British attempt to maintain a noncommunist 
government in Greece. According to that report, Roosevelt had made it 
quite clear that the American public’s favorable disposition toward post- 
war Anglo-American cooperation was fragile: . . the British have been 
told with force and authority that the mood can change as mercurially as 
the English weather if the American people once get the idea that this 
war . . . [is] just another struggle between rival imperialisms.” 51 

But if America refused to defend Europe, and British attempts to act 
alone were labeled as imperialist, the doctrine of the Four Policemen 
would lead to the same vacuum that the concept of collective security had 
in the 1930s. Until American perceptions changed, resistance to Soviet 
expansionism would be impossible. By the time America came to grips 
with this danger and re-entered the fray, the result would be the very 
spheres of influence it had so strenuously avoided during the war, albeit 
with a much less propitious demarcation line. At the end of the day, 
geopolitics could not be denied America was drawn back into Europe; 
Japan and Germany were restored in order to rebuild the equilibrium; 
and the Soviet Union embarked on forty-five years of tension and strategic 
overextension leading to its final collapse. 

Asia presented another difficult problem. Roosevelt had included China 
in the Big Four partly as a courtesy and partly to have an Asian anchor to 
his global design. However, China was even less capable than Great Brit- 
ain of carrying out the mission Roosevelt had assigned to it. At the end of 
the war, China was an underdeveloped country in the throes of civil war. 
How could it serve as a world policeman? When Roosevelt discussed his 
idea of the Four Policemen at Teheran, Stalin had raised the reasonable 
question of how Europeans would react if China were to try to settle their 
disputes. He added that, in his view, China would not be strong enough 
for such a global role, and suggested instead the creation of regional 
committees to maintain the peace. 52 Roosevelt rejected this suggestion as 
tending toward spheres of influence; peace had to be defended on a 
global basis or not at all. 

And yet, when all these ambiguities surrounding Roosevelt have been 
catalogued, the question remains whether any other approach could have 
commanded the support of the American people. Americans, after all, 
have always been more prepared to believe that a system based on the 
explicit rejection of democratic principles might suddenly reverse course 
than that they might have anything to learn from previous peace settle- 
ments — none of which, in the real world, had prospered without equilib- 
rium or lasted for any length of time without a moral consensus. 

Churchill’s geopolitical analysis proved far more accurate than Roose- 


421 



Diplomacy 


velt’s. Yet Roosevelt’s reluctance to see the world in geopolitical terms 
was the reverse side of the same idealism which had propelled America 
into the war and enabled it to preserve the cause of freedom. Had Roose- 
velt followed Churchill’s prescriptions, he would have improved Amer- 
ica’s bargaining position but might have sacrificed its ability to sustain the 
confrontations of the Cold War that were still ahead. 

That Roosevelt went more than the proverbial extra mile during the 
war was the precondition for the great initiatives by which America would 
restore the global equilibrium — although the United States denied the 
entire time that this was what it was in fact doing. Roosevelt’s conception 
of the postwar world may have been far too optimistic. But in light of 
American history, this position almost surely represented a necessary 
stage that America needed to traverse if it hoped to overcome the crisis 
ahead. In the end, Roosevelt led his society through two of the most 
tremendous crises of its history. He would surely not have been so suc- 
cessful in those endeavors had he been more imbued with a sense of 
historical relativity. 

However inevitably, the war ended with a geopolitical vacuum. The 
balance of power had been destroyed, and a comprehensive peace treaty 
remained elusive. The world was now divided into ideological camps. 
The postwar period would turn into an extended and painful struggle to 
achieve the settlement which had eluded the leaders before the war 
ended. 


422 



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 


The Beginning of 
the Cold War 


Like Moses, Franklin Delano Roosevelt saw the Promised Land, but it 
was not given to him to reach it. When he died, Allied armies stood deep 
inside Germany, and the battle for Okinawa, the prelude to the planned 
Allied invasion of Japan’s main islands, had just begun. 

Roosevelt’s death on April 12, 1945, was not unexpected. In January, 
Roosevelt’s doctor, alarmed by the sharp fluctuations in his patient’s 
blood pressure, had concluded that the President would survive only if 
he avoided any tension. Given the pressures of the presidency, that assess- 
ment was tantamount to a death sentence. 1 For one mad moment, Hitler 
and Goebbels, who were trapped in encircled Berlin, deluded themselves 
into believing that they were about to witness a replay of what German 
history books describe as the miracle of the House of Brandenburg — 
when, during the Seven Years’ War, as Russian armies stood at the gates 
of Berlin, Frederick the Great was saved by the sudden death of the 
Russian ruler and the accession of a friendly tsar. History, however, did 


423 


Diplomacy 


not repeat itself in 1945. Nazi crimes had welded at least one unshakable 
common Allied purpose: to eliminate the scourge of Nazism. 

The collapse of Nazi Germany and the need to fill the resulting power 
vacuum led to the disintegration of the wartime partnership. The pur- 
poses of the Allies were simply too divergent. Churchill sought to prevent 
the Soviet Union from dominating Central Europe. Stalin wanted to be 
paid in territorial coin for Soviet military victories and the heroic suffer- 
ing of the Russian people. The new President, Harry S. Truman, initially 
strove to continue Roosevelt’s legacy of holding the alliance together. By 
the end of his first term, however, every vestige of wartime harmony had 
vanished. The United States and the Soviet Union, the two giants at the 
periphery, were now facing off against one another in the very heart of 
Europe. 

Harry S. Truman s background was as different from that of his great 
predecessor as could be imagined. Roosevelt had been a member in 
good standing of the cosmopolitan Northeastern establishment; Truman 
came from the Midwestern rural middle class. Roosevelt had been edu- 
cated at the best preparatory schools and universities; Truman had never 
gone beyond the secondary school level, though Dean Acheson was to 
say of him affectionately and admiringly that he was a Yale man in the 
best sense of the word. Roosevelt’s entire life had been a preparation for 
the highest office; Truman was a product of the Kansas City political 
machine. 

Selected as vice president only after Roosevelt’s first choice, James 
Byrnes, was vetoed by the labor movement, Harry Truman gave little 
indication in his prior political career that he would turn out to be an 
extraordinary president. Without any real foreign policy experience and 
left equipped by Roosevelt with only the vaguest of road maps, Truman 
inherited the task of winding down the war and building a new interna- 
tional order even while the design established at Teheran and at Yalta 
was coming apart. 

As it turned out, Truman presided over the beginning of the Cold War 
and the development of the policy of containment that would eventually 
win it. He took the United States into its first peacetime military alliance. 
Under his guidance, Roosevelt’s concept of the Four Policemen was re- 
placed by an unprecedented set of coalitions which were to remain at the 
core of American foreign policy for forty years. Espousing America’s faith 
in the universality of its values, this plain man from the Midwest encour- 
aged prostrate enemies to rejoin the society of democratic nations. He 
sponsored the Marshall Plan and the Point Four Program, through which 
America devoted resources and technology to the recovery and develop- 
ment of distant societies. 


424 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


I met Truman only once, early in 1961, while I was a junior professor 
at Harvard. A speaking engagement in Kansas City provided me with an 
occasion to call on the ex-President at the Truman Presidential Library in 
nearby Independence, Missouri. The passage of the years had not dimin- 
ished the former President’s jauntiness. After taking me on a tour of the 
institution, Truman invited me to his office, which was a replica of the 
White House Oval Office during his presidency. Having heard that I was 
consulting part-time at the Kennedy White House, he asked me what I 
had learned. Drawing on standard Washington cocktail-party wisdom, I 
replied that the bureaucracy appeared to me to function as a fourth 
branch of government, severely constricting the president’s freedom of 
action. Truman found this remark neither amusing nor instructive. Impa- 
tient at being subjected to what he labeled “professor talk,” he responded 
with an expletive, then introduced his view of the role of the president: 
“If the president knows what he wants, no bureaucrat can stop him. A 
president has to know when to stop taking advice.” 

Quickly retreating to more familiar academic ground, I asked Truman 
for which foreign policy decision he most wanted to be remembered. He 
did not hesitate. “We completely defeated our enemies and made them 
surrender,” he remarked “And then we helped them to recover, to be- 
come democratic, and to rejoin the community of nations. Only America 
could have done that.” Afterward, he walked with me through the streets 
of Independence to the simple house in which he lived so that I could 
meet his wife, Bess. 

I recount this brief conversation because it captured so completely 
Truman’s quintessential^ American nature: his sense for the majesty of 
the presidency and the responsibilities of the president, his pride in 
America’s strength, and, above all, his belief that America’s ultimate call- 
ing was to serve as a fount of freedom and progress for all mankind. 

Truman embarked on his own presidency from deep within the 
shadow of Roosevelt, who had by his death been elevated to near-mythic 
stature. Truman genuinely admired Roosevelt but, in the end, as every 
new president must, he shaped the office he had inherited from the 
perspective of his own experiences and values. 

Upon becoming President, Truman had a far less emotional commit- 
ment to Allied unity than Roosevelt had had; to the son of the isolationist 
Midwest, Allied unity represented more of a practical preference than an 
emotional or moral necessity. Nor had Truman experienced the exalta- 
tion of wartime partnership with the Soviets, whom in any event he had 
always viewed warily. When Hitler attacked the Soviet Union, the then 
Senator Truman rated the two dictatorships as being morally equivalent, 
and recommended that America encourage them to fight to the death: “If 


425 



Diplomacy 


we see that Germany is winning, we ought to help Russia, and if Russia is 
winning we ought to help Germany and that way let them kill as many 
as possible, although I don't want to see Hitler victorious under any 
circumstances. Neither of them think anything of their pledged word.” 2 

Despite Roosevelt’s deteriorating health, Truman had not been invited 
to participate in any of the key foreign policy decisions during his three- 
month tenure as Vice-President. Nor had he been briefed about the proj- 
ect to build the atom bomb. 

Truman inherited an international environment w r hose dividing lines 
were inchoately based on the position of armies advancing from east and 
west. The political fate of the countries liberated by Allied armies had not 
yet been resolved. Most of the traditional Great Powers still had to adjust 
to their changed roles. France was prostrate; Great Britain, though victori- 
ous, was exhausted; Germany was being carved into four occupation 
zones — having haunted Europe with its strength since 1871, its impo- 
tence now threatened it with chaos. Stalin had advanced the Soviet fron- 
tier 600 miles west to the Elbe, while a vacuum was opening up in front 
of his armies due to the weakness of Western Europe and the planned 
withdrawal of American forces. 

Truman’s first instinct was to get along with Stalin, especially since the 
American chiefs of staff remained anxious for Soviet participation in the 
war against Japan. Although he had been put off by Molotov’s intransigent 
behavior at his first encounter with the Soviet Foreign Minister in April 
1945, he ascribed the difficulties to a difference in historical experience. 
“We have to get tough with Russians,” Truman said. “They don’t know 
how to behave. They are like bulls in a china shop. They are only twenty- 
five years old. We are over a hundred and the British are centuries older. 
We have got to teach them how to behave.” 3 

It was a characteristically American statement. Starting out from an 
assumption of underlying harmony, Truman ascribed disagreements with 
the Soviets not to conflicting geopolitical interests but to “misbehavior” 
and “political immaturity.” In other words, he believed in the possibility 
of propelling Stalin to “normal” conduct. Coming to grips with the reality, 
that the tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States had not 
been caused by some misunderstanding but were in fact generic, was the 
story of the beginning of the Cold War. 

Truman inherited Roosevelt’s top advisers, and he began his presi- 
dency intending to pursue his predecessor’s conception of the Four Po- 
licemen. In an address on April 16, 1945, four days after taking office, 
Truman drew a bleak contrast between world community and chaos and 
saw r no alternative to global collective security except anarchy. Truman 


426 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


rededicated himself to Roosevelts faith in the special obligation of the 
wartime Allies to maintain their unity in order to establish and preserve 
a new peaceful international order, above all to defend the principle that 
international disputes should not be settled by force: 

Nothing is more essential to the future peace of the world than contin- 
ued cooperation of the nations which had to muster the force necessary 
to defeat the conspiracy of the axis powers to dominate the world. 

While these great states have a special responsibility to enforce the 
peace, their responsibility is based upon the obligations resting upon 
all states, large and small, not to use force in international relations 
except in the defense of law. 4 

Apparently Truman’s speech-writers did not feel that they owed him 
much variety, or perhaps they considered their standard text incapable of 
improvement, for they repeated the same point verbatim on April 25, in 
Truman’s speech to the organizing conference of the United Nations in 
San Francisco. 

Despite the high-flown rhetoric, hard geopolitical facts were shaping 
conditions on the ground. Stalin returned to his old ways of conducting 
foreign policy, and demanded payment for his victories in the only cur- 
rency he took seriously — territorial control. He understood bargains and 
might have been willing to discuss some, but only so long as they in- 
volved precise quid pro quos — such as spheres of interest, or trading 
limits on communist influence in Eastern Europe for specific benefits like 
massive economic assistance. What was beyond the ken of one of the 
most unscrupulous leaders ever to have headed a major country, was the 
idea of basing foreign policy on collective goodwill or international law. 
In Stalin’s view, face-to-face encounters between world leaders might 
register a correlation of forces or a calculation of the national interest, 
but they could not alter it. He therefore never responded to any of Roose- 
velt’s or Churchill’s appeals to return to their wartime camaraderie. 

It is possible that the enormous prestige Roosevelt had garnered might 
have caused Stalin to moderate his approach for a little while longer. In 
the end, Stalin would make concessions only to “objective” reality; to 
him, diplomacy was but one aspect of a broader and unavoidable struggle 
to define the relationship of forces. Stalin’s problem in dealing with 
American leaders was that he had great difficulty comprehending the 
importance of morality and legalism in their thinking on foreign policy. 
Stalin genuinely did not understand why American leaders should be 
making such a fuss over the domestic structures of the Eastern European 


427 



Diplomacy 


states, where they had no ostensible strategic interest. The Americans’ 
stand on principle, unrelated to any concrete interests as these had been 
conventionally understood, made Stalin look for ulterior motives. “I am 
afraid,” reported Averell Harriman, while serving as Ambassador to Mos- 
cow, that 

. . . Stalin does not, and never will, fully understand our interest in a 
free Poland as a matter of principle. He is a realist . . . and it is hard for 
him to appreciate our faith in abstract principles. It is difficult for him 
to understand why we should want to interfere with Soviet policy in a 
country like Poland, which he considers so important to Russia’s secu- 
rity, unless we have some ulterior motive 5 

Stalin, a master practitioner of Realpolitik, must have expected America 
to resist the new geopolitical balance established by the Red Army’s pres- 
ence in the center of the European Continent. A man of iron nerves, he 
was not given to making pre-emptive concessions; he must have reasoned 
that it was far better to consolidate the bargaining chips he already held 
while sitting warily in possession of his prizes, and to leave it to the Allies 
to make the next move. And the only moves Stalin would take seriously 
were those possessed of consequences which could be analyzed in terms 
of risk and reward. When the Allies failed to exercise any pressure, Stalin 
simply stayed put. 

Stalin displayed toward the United States the same taunting manner he 
had adopted toward Hitler in 1940. In 1945, the Soviet Union, debilitated 
by tens of millions of casualties and the devastation of a third of its 
territory, faced an undamaged America possessing an atomic monopoly; 
in 1940, it had confronted a Germany in control of the rest of the Conti- 
nent. In each case, rather than offer concessions, Stalin consolidated the 
Soviet position and tried to bluff his potential adversaries into believing 
that he was more likely to march farther west than to retreat. And in each 
case, he miscalculated the reaction of his opponents. In 1940, Molotov’s 
visit to Berlin had strengthened Hitler’s decision to invade; in 1945, the 
same Foreign Minister managed to transform American goodwill into the 
confrontation of the Cold War. 

Churchill understood Stalin’s diplomatic calculations and sought to 
counter them by making two moves of his own. He urged an early summit 
of the three wartime Allies to bring matters to a head before the Soviet 
sphere was consolidated. Pending that, he wanted the Allies to get into 
their hands as many bargaining chips as possible. He saw an opportunity 
for this in the fact that Allied and Soviet armies had met farther east than 


428 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


had been foreseen, and that, as a result, Allied forces were in control of 
nearly a third of the area assigned to the Soviet zone of occupation in 
Germany, including most of the industrialized portion. Churchill pro- 
posed using this territory as leverage in the forthcoming negotiations. On 
May 4, 1945, he cabled instructions to Foreign Secretary Eden, who was 
about to meet Truman in Washington: 

. . . the Allies ought not to retreat from their present positions to the 
occupational line until we are satisfied about Poland, and also about 
the temporary character of the Russian occupation of Germany, and the 
conditions to be established in the Russianised or Russian-controlled 
countries in the Danube valley, particularly Austria and Czechoslovakia, 
and the Balkans. 6 

The new American administration, however, was no more hospitable to 
British Realpolitik than Roosevelt’s had been. The patterns of wartime 
diplomacy were, therefore, repeated. American leaders were happy 
enough to agree to a summit scheduled at Potsdam, near Berlin, for the 
second half of July. But Truman was not yet willing to accept Churchill’s 
suggestion that the way to deal with Stalin was to assemble rewards and 
penalties in order to produce the desired result. Indeed, the Truman 
Administration proved just as eager as its predecessor to teach Churchill 
that the days of balance-of-power diplomacy were irrevocably past. 

At the end of June, less than a month before the planned summit, 
American forces withdrew to the agreed demarcation line, leaving Great 
Britain no other choice than to follow their example. Moreover, just 
as Roosevelt had vastly overestimated British capabilities, the Truman 
Administration envisaged itself in the role of mediator between Great 
Britain and the Soviet Union. Determined to avoid any impression of 
ganging up on Stalin, Truman, to Churchill’s chagrin, rejected an invita- 
tion to stop in Great Britain on the way to Potsdam, to celebrate the 
Anglo-American victory. 

Truman, however, had no inhibition about seeing Stalin without 
Churchill. Using the same pretext that Roosevelt had invoked when he 
tried to arrange the Bering Straits meeting — that, unlike Churchill, he 
had never met Stalin — he proposed a separate meeting with the Soviet 
ruler. But Churchill turned out to be just as sensitive about being ex- 
cluded from a Soviet-American dialogue as Truman’s advisers had been 
about giving the impression that Washington and London were acting 
in tandem. According to Truman’s memoirs, Churchill testily notified 
Washington that he would not attend any summit which was a continua- 


429 



Diplomacy 


tion of a conference between Truman and Stalin. 7 To carry out his role as 
self-appointed mediator and to establish direct contact with the leaders 
of the Allies, Truman decided to send emissaries to London and Moscow. 

Harry Hopkins, Roosevelt’s old confidant, was dispatched to Moscow; 
the envoy sent to see Churchill was, curiously enough, selected more on 
account of his ability to reassure Stalin than for his demonstrated skills at 
exploring what was on the British Prime Minister’s mind. He was Joseph 
E. Davies, the prewar ambassador to Moscow who had written the best- 
selling book Mission to Moscow. 

Though Davies was an investment banker, hence in communist eyes 
an arch-capitalist, he had developed the propensity of most American en- 
voys — especially of non-career diplomats — to turn into self-appointed 
spokesmen for the countries to which they are accredited. Davies’ book 
about his ambassadorial adventures had parroted Soviet propaganda on 
every conceivable subject, including the guilt of the victims of the purge 
trials. Sent by Roosevelt on a wartime mission to Moscow, the egregiously 
miscast Davies had had the extraordinary insensitivity to show a movie 
based on his best-seller to a group of top Soviet leaders at the American 
embassy. The official report noted dryly that the Soviet guests had 
watched with "glum curiosity” as the guilt of their former colleagues was 
proclaimed from the screen. 8 (And well they might have. Not only did 
they know better, but they could not discount the possibility that the film 
might well be depicting their own futures.) Truman, therefore, could 
hardly have sent anyone to Downing Street less likely to appreciate 
Churchill’s view of the postwar world. 

Davies’ visit to London in late May of 1945 proved nearly as surreal as 
his wartime mission to Moscow had been. Davies was far more interested 
in continuing America’s partnership with the Soviet Union than in foster- 
ing Anglo-American relations. Churchill expounded to the American 
envoy his fear that Stalin intended to swallow up Central Europe, and 
stressed the necessity of a united Anglo-American front to resist him. 
Davies reacted to Churchill’s analysis of the Soviet challenge by sardoni- 
cally asking the Old Lion whether perhaps "he and Britain had made a 
mistake in not supporting Hitler, for as I understood him, he was now 
expressing the doctrine which Hitler and Goebbels had been proclaiming 
and reiterating for the past four years in an effort to break up Allied unity 
and ‘divide and conquer.’ ” 9 As far as Davies was concerned, East-West 
diplomacy would go nowhere unless it was based on the premise of 
Stalin’s good faith. 

Davies reported back to Truman in the same vein. Whatever Churchill’s 
greatness, in Davies’ view he was "first, last, and all the time” a great 


430 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


Englishman, more interested in preserving England’s position in Europe 
than in preserving the peace . 10 Admiral Leahy, initially Roosevelt’s, now 
Truman’s chief of staff, confirmed that Davies’ view was widely held by 
endorsing Davies’ report: "This was consistent with our staff estimate of 
Churchill’s attitude throughout the war .” 11 

Nothing better illustrates America’s knee-jerk reaction to Realpolitik . 
Davies and Leahy were vocally displeased that the British Prime Minister 
should be primarily concerned with British national interests — some- 
thing that the statesmen of any other country would have treated as the 
most natural thing in the world. Even though Churchill’s pursuit of a 
balance of power on the Continent incarnated three centuries of British 
history, Americans viewed it as being somehow aberrant, and contrasted 
the quest for peace with the effort to maintain such a balance — as if 
means and ends were incompatible rather than complementary. 

Hopkins, who had visited Moscow several times as a wartime emissary, 
found the atmosphere of his parallel mission extremely congenial. Even 
so, it is possible that his meetings with Stalin unintentionally deepened 
the deadlock over Eastern Europe and hastened the onset of the Cold 
War. For Hopkins followed his wartime pattern of emphasizing harmony 
over confrontation. He could not bring himself to impart to Stalin the 
extent to which his course was risking serious trouble with an aroused 
American public. Throughout his diplomatic career, Hopkins operated 
on the premise that all disagreements would dissolve in an atmosphere 
of understanding and goodwill — categories for which Stalin had very 
little comprehension to begin with. 

Stalin saw Hopkins on six separate occasions in late May and early June. 
Applying his usual technique of placing his interlocutor on the defensive, 
Stalin complained about the termination of Lend-Lease and the general 
cooling off of Soviet-American relations. He warned that the Soviet Union 
would never yield to pressure — a standard diplomatic ploy that is used 
when the negotiator is searching for a face-saving means of determining 
what concessions are wanted without suggesting that he will accept them. 
Stalin purported not to understand America’s concern about holding free 
elections in Poland. After all, the Soviet Union had not raised a compara- 
ble issue with respect to Italy and Belgium, where elections had also not 
yet been held. Why should the Western powers concern themselves with 
Poland and the countries of the Danube basin, which were located so 
close to the Soviet borders? 

Hopkins and Stalin fenced inconclusively without Hopkins ever manag- 
ing to convey to Stalin that Americans were deadly serious about the issue 
of Eastern European self-determination. Indeed, Hopkins exhibited the 


431 



Diplomacy 


proclivity of most American negotiators to put forward even their most 
strongly held positions in a manner which avoids any suggestion of in- 
transigence. Expecting compromise, they look for ways to give their inter- 
locutors a graceful way out. The reverse side of this approach is that, once 
American negotiators lose faith in the other side’s goodwill, they tend to 
turn intractable and at times excessively rigid. 

The weaknesses of Hopkins’ negotiating style were magnified by the 
extraordinary reservoir of goodwill toward Stalin and the Soviet Union 
that had been left over from the wartime alliance. By June 1945, Stalin 
had already unilaterally fixed Poland’s eastern as well as western border, 
brutally promoted Soviet puppets in the government, and flagrantly vio- 
lated his pledge at Yalta to organize free elections. Even so, Harry Hop- 
kins found it possible to describe Soviet-American disagreements to Stalin 
as “a train of events, each unimportant in themselves[, that] had grown 
up around the Polish question.” 12 Relying on Roosevelt’s tactic from the 
days of Teheran and Yalta, he asked Stalin to modify his demands in 
Eastern Europe to help ease domestic pressures on the Truman Adminis- 
tration. 

Stalin professed to be open to suggestions about how to make the 
new Polish government consistent with American principles. He invited 
Hopkins to recommend four or five individuals from the democratic side 
who might be added to the Warsaw government, which he claimed had 
been created by the Soviet Union due to the “compulsion” of military 
necessity. 13 Of course, token participation in a communist government 
was not the real issue; free elections were. And the communists had 
already demonstrated a remarkable skill at destroying coalition govern- 
ments. In any event, Hopkins could not have impressed Stalin with Amer- 
ica’s grasp of the Polish situation when he admitted that he had no specific 
names to suggest for the new government. 

In insisting on a free hand vis-a-vis his neighbors, Stalin was following 
traditional Russian practice. From the time Russia had emerged on the 
international scene two centuries earlier, its leaders had been attempting 
to settle disputes with their neighbors bilaterally rather than at interna- 
tional conferences. Neither Alexander I in the 1820s, Nicholas I thirty 
years later, nor Alexander II in 1878 understood why Great Britain in- 
sisted on interposing itself between Russia and Turkey. In these and 
subsequent instances, Russian leaders took the position that they were 
entitled to a free hand in dealing with their neighbors. If thwarted, they 
tended to resort to force. And once having resorted to force, they never 
withdrew unless they were threatened with war. 

The visits of Truman’s emissaries to London and Moscow proved, above 


432 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


all, that he was still trying to steer a course between Roosevelt’s view of 
how to maintain the peace, in which America had no partners, and his 
growing resentment of Soviet conduct in Eastern Europe, for which he as 
yet had no policy. Truman was not ready to face the geopolitical realities 
victory had wrought, or to jettison Roosevelt’s vision of a world order 
governed by the Four Policemen. Nor would America yet concede that 
the balance of power was a necessity of the international order and not 
an aberration of European diplomacy. 

Roosevelt’s dream of the Four Policemen came to an end at the Pots- 
dam Conference, which lasted from July 17 to August 2, 1945. The three 
leaders met at the Cecilienhof, a cavernous, English-style country house 
set in a large park which had served as the residence of the last German 
crown prince. Potsdam was chosen as the site of the conference because 
it was in the Soviet zone of occupation, was accessible by rail (Stalin 
hated to fly), and could be protected by Soviet security forces. 

When the American delegation arrived, it was still committed to the 
wartime view of a new world order. The State Department briefing paper, 
which served as the touchstone for the American delegation, asserted that 
the establishment of spheres of interest would be the greatest threat to 
world peace. Invoking Wilsonian orthodoxy, the paper argued that 
spheres of interest would “represent power politics pure and simple, 

with all the concomitant disadvantages Our primary objective should 

be to remove the causes which make nations feel that such spheres are 
necessary to build their security, rather than to assist one country to build 
up strength against another.” 14 The State Department did not explain 
what, in the absence of power politics, might encourage Stalin to compro- 
mise, or what the cause of the conflict might be if it was not clashing 
interests. Nevertheless, the ubiquitous Joseph Davies, who came along as 
the President’s adviser on the Soviet leaders, seemed pleased enough 
with his own recommendation — which amounted to indulging Stalin. At 
one point, after an intense exchange, Davies slipped a note to Truman 
which said: “I think Stalin’s feelings are hurt, please be nice to him.” 15 

Coddling people, especially communists, did not come naturally to 
Truman. Still, he gave it a heroic try. Initially he appreciated Stalin’s curt 
style more than he did Churchill’s eloquence. As he wrote to his mother: 
“Churchill talks all the time and Stalin just grunts but you know what he 
means.” 16 At a private dinner on July 21, Truman pulled out all the stops, 
later confiding to Davies: “. . . I wanted to convince him that we are ‘on 
the level’ and interested in peace and a decent world, and had no pur- 
poses hostile to them; that we wanted nothing for ourselves, but security 
for our country, and peace with friendship and neighborliness, and that 


433 



Diplomacy 


it was our joint job to do that. I ‘spread it on thick,’ and I think he believes 
me. I meant every word of it.” 17 Unfortunately, Stalin had no frame of 
reference for interlocutors who proclaimed their disinterestedness in the 
issues before them. 

The leaders at the Potsdam Conference sought to avoid the organiza- 
tional problems that had plagued the Versailles Conference. Rather than 
getting bogged down in details and working under time constraints, Tru- 
man, Churchill, and Stalin would confine themselves to general princi- 
ples. Their foreign ministers would then work out the details of the peace 
agreements with the defeated Axis Powers and their allies. 

Even with that restriction, the conference had a vast agenda which 
included reparations, the future of Germany, and the status of such Ger- 
man allies as Italy, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, and Finland. Stalin ex- 
tended this list by presenting the catalogue of demands that Molotov had 
submitted to Hitler in 1940 and had reiterated to Eden a year later. These 
demands included improved Russian transit through the Straits, a Soviet 
military base in the Bosporus, and a share of Italy’s colonies. An agenda 
of such scope could not have possibly been fulfilled by the harassed 
heads of government in a two-week period. 

The Potsdam Conference rapidly turned into a dialogue of the deaf. 
Stalin insisted on consolidating his sphere. Truman and, to a lesser extent, 
Churchill demanded the vindication of their principles. Stalin tried to 
trade Western recognition of Soviet- imposed governments in Bulgaria 
and Romania for Soviet recognition of Italy. In the meantime, Stalin per- 
sisted in stonewalling the democracies’ demand for free elections in 
Eastern Europe. 

In the end, each side exercised a veto wherever it had the power to do 
so. The United States and Great Britain refused to agree to Stalin’s de- 
mand for $20 billion in reparations from Germany (half of which was to 
go to the Soviet Union), or to make the assets of their zones available for 
that purpose. On the other side, Stalin continued to strengthen the posi- 
tion of Communist Parties all over Eastern Europe. 

Stalin also used the ambiguity in the Yalta agreement with respect to 
the Oder and Neisse rivers to extend Poland’s borders farther west. At 
Yalta it had been decided that the rivers would serve as the demarcation 
between Poland and Germany, though, as already noted, no one seemed 
to have realized that there were in fact two rivers called “Neisse.” 
Churchill had understood the eastern one to be the border. But, at Pots- 
dam, Stalin revealed that he had assigned the area between the eastern 
and the western Neisse rivers to Poland. Stalin had clearly calculated that 
the enmity between Poland and Germany would become intractable if 


434 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


Poland acquired historic German territories, including the ancient Ger- 
man city of Breslau, and evicted 5 million more Germans. The American 
and British leaders acquiesced in Stalin’s fait accompli with the meaning- 
less proviso that they would reserve their final position on the border 
question until the peace conference. This reservation, however, merely 
magnified Poland’s dependence on the Soviet Union, and represented 
little more than empty posturing since it concerned territories from 
which the German populations were being expelled. 

Churchill had come to Potsdam from a not particularly strong domestic 
position. Indeed, the rhythm of the conference, such as it was, was fatally 
interrupted on July 25, 1945, when the British delegation had to ask for a 
recess in order to return home to await the results of the first general 
election since 1935. Churchill never did come back to Potsdam, having 
suffered a crushing defeat. Clement Attlee took his place as the new Prime 
Minister, and Ernest Bevin arrived as Foreign Secretary 7 . 

Potsdam accomplished little. Many of Stalin’s demands were rejected: 
the base on the Bosporus, his call for Soviet trusteeship of some of Italy’s 
African territories, and his desire for four-power control of the Ruhr and 
Western recognition of the Moscow-installed governments in Romania 
and Bulgaria. Truman too was thwarted in some of his proposals — most 
notably with respect to the internationalization of the Danube. The three 
heads of state did manage to hammer out some agreements. A four- 
power mechanism for dealing with German questions was set up. Truman 
succeeded in getting Stalin to accept his approach to reparations: that 
each power would take reparations out of its zone of occupation in 
Germany. The crucial question of Poland’s western border was ducked — 
the United States and Great Britain acquiesced in Stalin’s Oder-Neisse 
Line, but reserved the right to consider revision at a later date. Finally, 
Stalin promised to help in the war effort against Japan. Much was left 
ambiguous and undone and, as often happens when heads of state cannot 
agree, the nettlesome issues were passed on to their foreign ministers for 
further discussion. 

Perhaps the most significant incident at Potsdam concerned an item 
that was not on the formal agenda. At one point, Truman took Stalin aside 
to inform him of the existence of the atom bomb. Stalin, of course, 
already knew about it from his Soviet spies; as a matter of fact, he had 
known about it well before Truman did. Given his paranoia, he undoubt- 
edly considered Truman’s communication a transparent attempt at intimi- 
dation. He chose to act impervious to the new technology and to 
deprecate it by exhibiting no particular curiosity. “The Russian Premier,” 
wrote Truman in his memoirs, “showed no special interest. All he said 


435 



Diplomacy 


was that he was glad to hear it and that he hoped we would make 'good 
use of it against the Japanese.’ ” 18 This would remain the Soviet tactic with 
respect to nuclear weapons until it had developed its own. 

Afterward, Churchill was to say that, had he been re-elected, he would 
have brought matters to a head at Potsdam and tried to force a settle- 
ment. 19 He never specified what he had in mind. The fact is that Stalin 
could have been induced to settle, if at all, only under extreme duress, 
and even then only at the last moment. Indeed, Churchill’s yearning for a 
comprehensive solution defined America’s dilemma: no American states- 
man was prepared to issue the kind of threat or pressure which Churchill 
envisioned and which Stalin’s psychology would have required. American 
leaders had not yet come to grips with the reality that the more time 
Stalin was given to create one-party states in Eastern Europe, the more 
difficult it would become to get him to change course. At the end of the 
war, the American public was weary of war and confrontation, and wanted 
above all to bring the boys home. It was not ready to threaten further 
confrontation, much less a nuclear war, over political pluralism in Eastern 
Europe or its frontiers. Unanimity about resisting further communist ad- 
vances was matched by unanimity about not running any military risks. 

And confrontation with Stalin would not have been a tea party. The 
lengths to which Stalin was prepared to press his diplomacy were brought 
home to me in a conversation with Andrei Gromyko after he had left 
office in 1989. I asked him why the Soviet Union had risked the Berlin 
blockade so soon after a devastating war and in the face of America’s 
nuclear monopoly. Much mellowed in retirement, Gromyko replied that 
several advisers had expressed the same concern to Stalin, who had 
dismissed it on the basis of three propositions: first, the United States, he 
had said, would never use nuclear weapons over Berlin; second, if the 
United States attempted to push a convoy through to Berlin on the Auto- 
bahn, the Red Army was to resist; finally, if the United States seemed 
about to attack along the whole front, Stalin reserved the final decision 
for himself alone. That was the point at which he would presumably have 
settled. 

The practical result of Potsdam was the beginning of the process that 
divided Europe into two spheres of influence, the very scenario America’s 
wartime leaders had been most determined to avoid. Not surprisingly, 
the foreign ministers’ meeting was no more productive than their chiefs’ 
summit had been. Possessing less authority, they also had less flexibility. 
Molotov’s political as well as physical survival depended on the most rigid 
adherence to his instructions from Stalin. 

The first meeting of the foreign ministers took place in London in 


436 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


September and early October 1945- Its purpose was to draw up peace 
treaties for Finland, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria, all of which had 
fought on Germany’s side. American and Soviet positions had not 
changed since Potsdam. Secretary of State James Byrnes demanded free 
elections; Molotov would not hear of it. Byrnes had hoped that the dem- 
onstration of the awesome power of the atom bomb in Japan would 
have strengthened the American bargaining position. Instead, Molotov 
behaved as obstreperously as ever. By the end of the conference, it was 
clear that the atom bomb had not made the Soviets more cooperative — 
at least not in the absence of a more threatening diplomacy. Byrnes told 
his predecessor, Edward R. Stettinius: 

. . . we were facing a new Russia, totally different than the Russia we 
dealt with a year ago. As long as they needed us in the War and we 
were giving them supplies we had a satisfactory relationship but now 
that the War was over they were taking an aggressive attitude and stand 
on political territorial questions that was indefensible . 20 

The dream of the Four Policemen died hard. On October 27, 1945, a few 
weeks after the Foreign Ministers’ Conference aborted, Truman, speaking 
at a Navy Day celebration, combined the historic themes of American 
foreign policy with an appeal for Soviet-American cooperation. The 
United States, he said, sought neither territory nor bases, ‘nothing which 
belongs to any other power.” American foreign policy, as a reflection of 
the nation’s moral values, was “based firmly on fundamental principles 
of righteousness and justice,” and on refusing to “compromise with evil.” 
Invoking America’s traditional equation of private with public morality, 
Truman promised that “we shall not relent in our efforts to bring the 
Golden Rule into the international affairs of the world.” The emphasis 
Truman placed on the moral aspect of foreign policy served as a prelude 
to another appeal for Soviet-American conciliation. There were no “hope- 
less or irreconcilable” differences among the wartime Allies, affirmed 
Truman. “There are no conflicts of interest among the victorious powers 
so deeply rooted that they cannot be resolved.” 21 

It was not to be. The next Foreign Ministers’ Conference, in December 
1945, produced a Soviet “concession” of sorts. Stalin received Byrnes on 
December 23 and proposed that the three Western democracies send a 
commission to Romania and Bulgaria to advise these governments on 
how they might broaden their cabinets to include some democratic politi- 
cal figures. The cynicism of the offer, of course, demonstrated Stalin’s 
confidence in the communists’ grip on their satellites rather than his 


437 



Diplomacy 


receptiveness to democratic verities. This was also the view of George 
Kennan, who derided Stalins concessions as “fig leaves of democratic 
procedure to hide the nakedness of Stalinist dictatorship.” 22 

Byrnes, however, interpreted Stalins initiative as an acknowledgment 
that the Yalta agreement required some democratic gesture, and he pro- 
ceeded to recognize Bulgaria and Romania prior to concluding peace 
treaties with these countries. Truman was outraged that Byrnes had ac- 
cepted the compromise without consulting him. Although, after some 
hesitation, Truman did go along with Byrnes, it was the beginning of an 
estrangement between the President and his Secretary of State that would 
lead to Byrnes’ resignation within the year. 

In 1946, there were two more foreign ministers’ meetings, which took 
place in Paris and New York. These completed the subsidiary treaties but 
witnessed an increase in tensions as Stalin turned Eastern Europe into a 
political and economic appendage of the Soviet Union. 

The cultural gap between American and Soviet leaders contributed to 
the emerging Cold War. American negotiators acted as if the mere recita- 
tion of their legal and moral rights ought to produce the results they 
desired. But Stalin needed far more persuasive reasons to change his 
course. When Truman spoke of the Golden Rule, his American audiences 
took him literally, and genuinely believed in a world governed by legal 
norms. To Stalin, Truman’s words were meaningless, if not tricky, ver- 
biage. The new international order he had in mind was Pan-Slavism rein- 
forced by communist ideology. The Yugoslav dissident communist 
Milovan Djilas recounted a conversation in which Stalin had said: “ ‘If the 
Slavs keep united and maintain solidarity, no one in the future will be 
able to move a finger. Not even a finger!’ he [Stalin] repeated, emphasiz- 
ing his thought by cleaving the air with his forefinger.” 23 

Paradoxically, the drift toward the Cold War was accelerated by Stalin’s 
knowledge of how weak his country really was. Soviet territory west of 
Moscow had been devastated, for the standard practice of retreating ar- 
mies — first the Soviet, then the German — had been to blow up every 
chimney in order to deprive their pursuers of shelter against Russia’s 
brutal climate. The number of Soviet war dead (including civilians) was 
over 20 million. In addition, the death toll in all of Stalin’s purges, prison 
camps, forced collectivizations, and deliberately created famines has been 
estimated at another 20 million, with perhaps another 15 million that 
survived imprisonment in the gulag. 24 Now this worn-out country found 
itself suddenly faced with America’s technological breakthrough of the 
atom bomb. Could it mean that the moment long dreaded by Stalin had 
finally arrived, and that the capitalist world would be able to impose its 


438 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


will? Had all the suffering and exertion, inhuman by even Russia’s exorbi- 
tant tyrannical standards, brought them to nothing better than a one-sided 
capitalist advantage? 

With almost reckless bravado, Stalin chose to pretend that the Soviet 
Union was acting from strength, not weakness. Volunteering concessions 
was, in Stalin’s mind, a confession of vulnerability, and he viewed any 
such admission as likely to generate new demands and pressures. So he 
kept his army in the center of Europe, where he gradually imposed Soviet 
puppet governments. Going even further, he conveyed an image of such 
implacable ferocity that many thought him poised for a dash to the En- 
glish Channel — a fear widely recognized by posterity as chimerical. 

Stalin coupled his exaggeration of Soviet strength and bellicosity with 
a systematic effort to belittle American power, especially its most potent 
weapon, the atom bomb. Stalin had himself set the tone by his show 
of indifference when Truman informed him of the bomb’s existence. 
Communist propaganda, supported by well-meaning academic followers 
around the world, elaborated on the theme that the advent of nuclear 
weapons had not changed the rules of military strategy and that strategic 
bombing would prove ineffective. In 1946, Stalin laid down the official 
doctrine: ‘ Atomic bombs are intended to frighten people with weak 

nerves, but they cannot decide the outcome of a war ” 25 In Soviet 

public pronouncements, Stalin’s statement was quickly expanded into a 
distinction between “transitory” and “permanent” factors of strategy, in 
which the atom bomb was classified as a transitory phenomenon. “The 
warmongers,” wrote Marshal of Aviation Konstantin Vershinin in 1949, 
“exaggerate the role of the air force out of all proportion . . . [calculating] 
that the people of the USSR and the People’s Democracies will be intimi- 
dated by the so-called ‘atomic’ or ‘push button’ war.” 26 

An ordinary leader would have chosen respite for a society exhausted 
by war and the inhuman exactions that had preceded it. But the demonic 
Soviet General Secretary refused to grant his people any relief; indeed, 
he calculated — probably correctly— that if he ever gave his society a 
reprieve, it would begin to ask questions directed at the very foundations 
of communist rule. In an address to his victorious Red Army commanders 
shortly after the Armistice, in May 1945, Stalin used the emotional rhetoric 
of wartime for the last time. Addressing the group as “my friends, my 
countrymen,” he described the retreats of 1941 and 1942: 

Another nation might have said to the government: ‘You have not justi- 
fied our expectations, get out; we will set up a new government which 
will sign a peace with Germany and give us repose.’ But the Russian 


439 



Diplomacy 


people did not take that road because it had faith in the policy of its 
government. Thank you, great Russian people for your trust. 27 

It was Stalin’s last admission of fallibility and the last time he addressed 
his people as the head of government. (Interestingly, in his address Stalin 
gave credit only to the Russian people, and not to any other nationality of 
the Soviet Empire.) Within months, Stalin again returned to his position 
as General Secretary of the Communist Party as the basis for his authority, 
his manner of addressing the Soviet people reverting to the standard 
communist appellation of ‘comrades,” as he gave the Communist Party 
exclusive credit for the Soviet victory. 

In another major speech, on February 9, 1946, Stalin established the 
marching orders for the postwar period: 

Now victory means, first of all, that our Soviet social system has won, 
that the Soviet social system has successfully stood the test in the fire of 
war and has proved its complete vitality — [T]he Soviet social system 
has proved to be more capable of life and more stable than a non- 
Soviet social system, ... the Soviet social system is a better form of 
organization of society than any non- Soviet social system. 28 

In describing the causes of the war, Stalin invoked the true communist 
faith; the war, he said, had been caused not by Hitler but by the workings 
of the capitalist system: 

Our Marxists declare that the capitalist system of world economy con- 
ceals elements of crisis and war, that the development of world capital- 
ism does not follow a steady and even course forward, but proceeds 
through crises and catastrophes. The uneven development of the capi- 
talist countries leads in time to sharp disturbances in their relations 
and the group of countries which consider themselves inadequately 
provided with raw materials and export markets try usually to change 
this situation and to change the position in their favor by means of 
armed force. 29 

If Stalin’s analysis was correct, there was no essential difference between 
Hitler and the Soviet Union’s allies in the war against Hitler, A new war 
was inevitable sooner or later, and what the Soviet Union was experienc- 
ing was armistice, not a true peace. The task Stalin set before the Soviet 
Union was the same as it had been before the war: to become strong 
enough to deflect the inevitable conflict into a capitalist civil war and 
away from an attack on the communist motherland. Gone was any linger- 


440 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


ing prospect that peace would ease the day-to-day lot of the Soviet peo- 
ples. Heavy industry would be emphasized, collectivization of agriculture 
continued, and internal opposition crushed. 

Stalin’s speech was delivered in the standard prewar format — as a 
catechism in which Stalin posed and then answered his own questions. 
To his chilled audience, the refrain was all too familiar: as yet unidentified 
enemies were being threatened with extinction for seeking to thwart the 
socialist blueprint. Based on the personal experience of nearly every 
Soviet citizen, no one could consider such statements to be empty threats. 
At the same time, Stalin was also setting ambitious new goals: a tenfold 
increase in the production of pig iron, a fifteen-fold increase in steel 
production, and a quadrupling of oil output. “Only under such conditions 
will our country be insured against any eventuality. Perhaps three new 
Five-Year Plans will be required to achieve this, if not more. But it can be 
done and we must do it.” 30 Three Five-Year Plans meant that none of the 
survivors of the purges and of the Second World War would ever lead a 
normal life. 

When Stalin delivered this speech, the foreign ministers of the victori- 
ous alliance were still meeting regularly, American troops were being 
rapidly withdrawn from Europe, and Churchill had not yet delivered his 
Iron Curtain speech. Stalin was re-establishing a policy of confrontation 
with the West because he understood that the Communist Party he had 
shaped could not sustain itself in an international or domestic environ- 
ment dedicated to peaceful coexistence. 

It is possible — indeed, I believe, likely — that Stalin did not so much 
set out to establish what came to be known as the satellite orbit as to 
strengthen his hand for an inevitable diplomatic showdown. In fact, Sta- 
lin’s absolute control of Eastern Europe was challenged only rhetorically 
by the democracies and never in a manner which might have involved 
risks Stalin would have taken seriously. As a result, the Soviet Union was 
able to turn military occupation into a network of satellite regimes. 

The West’s reaction to its own nuclear monopoly deepened the stale- 
mate. In an ironic twist, scientists dedicated to avoiding nuclear war 
began fostering the amazing proposition that nuclear weapons did not 
alter the alleged lesson of World War II — that strategic bombing could 
not be decisive. 31 At the same time, Kremlin propaganda about the unal- 
tered state of the strategic environment was becoming widely accepted. 
The reason that American military doctrine of the late 1940s fell in with 
this view had to do with its own bureaucratic dynamics. By recoiling from 
identifying any one weapon as decisive, the chiefs of America’s military 
services made their own organizations appear more indispensable. They 


441 



Diplomacy 


thus developed a concept which treated nuclear weapons as a somewhat 
more effective high explosive in an overall strategy based on the experi- 
ences of the Second World War. In the period of the democracies’ great- 
est relative strength, this concept led to the general misapprehension that 
the Soviet Union was militarily superior because its traditional armies 
were larger. 

As in the 1930s, it was Churchill, now leader of the Opposition, who 
tried to recall the democracies to their necessities. On March 5, 1946, at 
Fulton, Missouri, he rang the tocsin about Soviet expansionism, 32 describ- 
ing an “Iron Curtain” which had fallen “from Stettin in the Baltic to 
Trieste in the Adriatic.” The Soviets had installed pro-communist govern- 
ments in every country which had been occupied by the Red Army as 
well as in the Soviet zone of Germany — the most useful part of which, he 
could not restrain himself from pointing out, had been handed over to 
the Soviets by the United States. In the end, this would “give the defeated 
Germans the power of putting themselves up to auction between the 
Soviets and the Western Democracies.” 

Churchill concluded that an alliance of the United States and the British 
Commonwealth was needed to meet the immediate threat. The long-term 
solution, however, was European unity, “from which no nation should be 
permanently outcast.” Churchill, the first and leading opponent of the 
Germany of the 1930s, thus became the first and leading advocate of 
reconciliation with the Germany of the 1940s. Churchill’s central theme, 
however, was that time was not on the side of the democracies, and that 
an overall settlement should urgently be sought: 

I do not believe that Soviet Russia desires war. What they desire is the 
fruits of war and the indefinite expansion of their power and doctrines. 
But what we have to consider here today while time remains, is the 
permanent prevention of war and the establishment of conditions of 
freedom and democracy as rapidly as possible in all countries. Our 
difficulties and dangers will not be removed by closing our eyes to 
them. They will not be removed by mere waiting to see what happens; 
nor will they be removed by a policy of appeasement. What is needed 
is a settlement, and the longer this is delayed, the more difficult it will 
be and the greater our dangers will become. 33 


The reason prophets are so rarely honored in their own country is that 
their role is to transcend the limits of their contemporaries’ experience 
and imagination. They achieve recognition only when their vision has 
been turned into experience — in short, when it is too late to benefit from 


442 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


their foresight. It was Churchill s fate to be rejected by his countrymen 
except for a brief time when their very survival was at stake. In the 1930s, 
he had urged his country to arm while his contemporaries were seeking 
to negotiate; in the 1940s and 1950s, he advocated a diplomatic show- 
down while his contemporaries, mesmerized by the self-induced illusion 
of their weakness, were more interested in building up their strength. 

In the end, the Soviet satellite orbit emerged by degrees, and partly by 
default. Analyzing Stalin’s speech calling for three new Five-Year Plans, 
George Kennan wrote in his famous “Long Telegram” how Stalin would 
view serious foreign pressure: “Intervention against USSR, while it would 
be disastrous to those who undertook it, would cause renewed delay in 
progress of Soviet socialism and must therefore be forestalled at all costs 
[emphasis added].” 34 Stalin could not have simultaneously reconstructed 
the Soviet Union and risked a confrontation with the United States. The 
much-advertised Soviet invasion of Western Europe was a fantasy; the 
likelier probability was that Stalin would have recoiled before a serious 
confrontation with the United States — though surely not without first 
carrying it quite a distance to test the seriousness of Western resolve. 

Stalin had been able to impose Eastern Europe’s frontiers without 
undertaking an inordinate risk because his armies already occupied those 
areas. But when it came to imposing Soviet-style regimes on those territo- 
ries, he turned much more cautious. In the first two years after the war, 
only Yugoslavia and Albania established communist dictatorships. The 
other five countries which later became Soviet satellites — Bulgaria, 
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Romania — had coalition govern- 
ments in which the communists were the strongest but not yet the unchal- 
lenged party. Two of the countries — Czechoslovakia and Hungary — held 
elections in the first year after the war that produced genuine multiparty 
systems. To be sure, systematic harassment of noncommunist parties was 
taking place, especially in Poland, but there was still no outright Soviet 
suppression of them. 

As late as September 1947, Andrei Zhdanov, who for a while was con- 
sidered Stalin’s closest collaborator, was identifying two categories of 
states in what he termed “the anti-fascist front” in Eastern Europe. In the 
speech announcing the formation of the Cominform, the formal grouping 
of worldwide communist parties which succeeded the Comintern, he 
called Yugoslavia, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Albania the “new democ- 
racies” (somewhat strangely in the case of Czechoslovakia, where the 
communist coup had not yet taken place). Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, 
and Finland were placed in another category, without as yet being given 
a clear-cut label. 35 


443 



Diplomacy 


Did this mean that Stalin’s fallback position for Eastern Europe was in 
fact a status similar to that of Finland — democratic and national but re- 
spectful of Soviet interests and concerns? Until Soviet archives are 
opened, we are confined to conjecture. We do know, however, that, 
although Stalin told Hopkins in 1945 that he wanted a friendly but not 
necessarily communist government in Poland, his proconsuls were im- 
plementing the exact opposite arrangement. Two years later, after 
America had committed itself to the Greek-Turkish aid program and was 
forming the three Western occupation zones of Germany into what later 
came to be known as the Federal Republic (see chapter 18), Stalin had 
another conversation with an American secretary of state. In April 1947, 
after eighteen months of deadlocked and increasingly acrimonious four- 
power foreign ministers’ meetings and a whole series of Soviet threats 
and unilateral moves, Stalin invited Secretary Marshall to a long meeting, 
in the course of which he stressed that he attached great importance to 
an overall agreement with the United States. The deadlocks and confron- 
tations, argued Stalin, “were only the first skirmishes and brushes of 
reconnaissance forces.” 36 Stalin claimed compromise was possible on 
“ all [emphasis added] the main questions,” insisting that “it was necessary 
to have patience and not become pessimistic.” 37 

If Stalin was serious, the master calculator had miscalculated. For, once 
Americans’ confidence in his good faith had been destroyed, there was to 
be no easy road back for him. Stalin had pressed his position too far 
because he never really understood the psychology of the democracies, 
especially America’s. The result was the Marshall Plan, the Atlantic Alli- 
ance, and the Western military buildup, none of which could have been 
in his game plan. 

Churchill had almost certainly been right — that the best time for a 
political settlement would have been immediately after the war. Whether 
Stalin would have made any meaningful concessions at that time would 
have depended to a great extent on the timing and the seriousness with 
which both the proposal and the consequences of its refusal had been 
presented to him. The sooner after the end of the war, the better the 
chances of success at minimal cost would have been. As America’s retreat 
from Europe accelerated, so did the decline of the West’s bargaining 
position — at least until the advent of the Marshall Plan and NATO. 

By the time of Stalin’s conversation with Marshall in 1947, the Soviet 
dictator had overplayed his hand. He was now distrusted in America to 
the same extent that he had previously basked in its goodwill. Even if 
America’s leap from pure goodwill to indiscriminate suspiciousness had 
overshot the mark, it nevertheless reflected the new international reali- 


444 



The Beginning of the Cold War 


ties. Theoretically, it might have been possible to consolidate a united 
front among the democracies while conducting negotiations with the 
Soviet Union about an overall settlement. But American leaders and their 
colleagues in Western Europe were convinced that the cohesion and the 
morale of the West were too fragile to withstand the ambiguities of a dual- 
track strategy. The communists represented the second-largest political 
parties in both France and Italy. The Federal Republic of Germany, which 
was then in the process of being formed, was split over whether it should 
seek national unity through neutralism. In Great Britain as well as in the 
United States, vocal peace movements were challenging the emerging 
policy of containment. 

In a radio address on April 28, Secretary of State Marshall indicated that 
the West had passed the point of no return in its policy toward the Soviet 
Union. He rejected Stalin’s hint of compromise on the ground that “we 
cannot ignore the factor of time involved here. The recovery of Europe 
has been far slower than had been expected. Disintegrating forces are 
becoming evident. The patient is sinking while the doctors deliberate. So 

I believe that action cannot await compromise through exhaustion 

Whatever action is possible to meet these pressing problems must be 
taken without delay.” 38 

America had opted for Western unity over East-West negotiations. It 
had really had no other choice, because it dared not run the risk of 
following up on Stalin’s hints only to find that he was using negotiations 
to undermine the new international order America was trying to build. 
Containment became the guiding principle of Western policy, and it re- 
mained so for the next forty years. 


445 




CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

The Success and the Pain 
of Containment 


In late 1945, American policymakers were at a loss. Potsdam and the 
ensuing foreign ministers’ conferences had come to naught. Stalin 
seemed to be imposing his will on Eastern Europe without any regard 
for American pieties about democracy. In Poland, Bulgaria, and Romania, 
American diplomats were consistently being met with Soviet intransi- 
gence. In a defeated Germany and Italy, Moscow seemed to have forgot- 
ten the meaning of the word “partnership.” What were American 
policymakers to make of all this? 

In the spring of 1946, Truman began to resolve this question when 
he launched a “get-tough” policy by successfully demanding the Soviet 
evacuation of Azerbaijan. But he did so within the Wilsonian mold. Like 
Roosevelt, Truman rejected the balance of power, disdained justifying 
American actions in terms of security, and sought whenever possible to 


446 




The Success and the Pain of Containment 


attach them to general principles applicable to all mankind and in keep- 
ing with the new United Nations Charter. Truman perceived the emerging 
struggle between the United States and the Soviet Union as a contest 
between good and evil, not as having to do with spheres of political 
influence. 

Yet spheres of influence were in fact emerging, no matter what Ameri- 
can statesmen called them, and they were to remain in place until the 
collapse of communism four decades later. Under United States leader- 
ship, the Western occupation zones of Germany were consolidated, while 
the Soviet Union turned the countries of Eastern Europe into its append- 
ages. The erstwhile Axis Powers — Italy, Japan, and, after 1949, the Federal 
Republic of Germany — gradually moved toward alliance with the United 
States. Although the Soviet Union cemented its dominance over Eastern 
Europe by means of the Warsaw Pact, this nominal alliance was obviously 
being held together by coercion. At the same time, the Kremlin tried its 
utmost to interrupt the process of Western consolidation by fostering a 
guerrilla war in Greece and by encouraging mass demonstrations by West 
European Communist parties, especially in France and Italy. 

American leaders knew that they had to resist further Soviet expansion. 
But their national tradition caused them to seek to justify this resistance 
on nearly any basis other than as an appeal to the traditional balance of 
power. In doing this, American leaders were not being hypocritical. When 
they finally came to recognize that Roosevelts vision of the Four Police- 
men could not be implemented, they preferred to interpret this develop- 
ment as a temporary setback on the way to an essentially harmonious 
world order. Here they faced a philosophical challenge. Was Soviet in- 
transigence merely a passing phase which Washington could wait out? 
Were the Americans, as former Vice-President Henry Wallace and his 
followers suggested, unwittingly causing the Soviets to feel paranoid by 
not adequately communicating their pacific intentions to Stalin? Did Stalin 
really reject postwar cooperation with the strongest nation in the world? 
Did he not want to be America’s friend? 

As the highest policymaking circles in Washington considered these 
questions, a document arrived from an expert on Russia, one George 
Kennan, a relatively junior diplomat at the American embassy in Moscow, 
that was to provide the philosophical and conceptual framework for inter- 
preting Stalin’s foreign policy. One of those rare embassy reports that 
would by itself reshape Washington’s view of the world, it became known 
as the “Long Telegram.” 1 Kennan maintained that the United States 
should stop blaming itself for Soviet intransigence; the sources of Soviet 
foreign policy lay deep within the Soviet system itself. In essence, he 


447 



Diplomacy 


argued, Soviet foreign policy was an amalgam of communist ideological 
zeal and old-fashioned tsarist expansionism. 

According to Kennan, communist ideology was at the heart of Stalin’s 
approach to the world. Stalin regarded the Western capitalist powers as 
irrevocably hostile. The friction between the Soviet Union and America 
was therefore not the product of some misunderstanding or faulty com- 
munications between Washington and Moscow, but inherent in the Soviet 
Union’s perception of the outside world; 


In this [communist] dogma, with its basic altruism of purpose, they 
found justification for their instinctive fear of outside world, for the 
dictatorship without which they did not know how to rule, for cruelties 
they did not dare not to inflict, for sacrifices they felt bound to demand. 
In the name of Marxism they sacrificed every single ethical value in 
their methods and tactics. Today they cannot dispense with it. It is fig 
leaf of their moral and intellectual respectability. Without it they would 
stand before history, at best, as only the last of that long succession of 
cruel and wasteful Russian rulers who have relentlessly forced [their] 
country on to ever new heights of military power in order to guarantee 
external security of their internally weak regimes 2 


From time immemorial, argued Kennan, the tsars had sought to expand 
their territory. They had sought to subjugate Poland, and to turn it into a 
dependent nation. They had regarded Bulgaria as being within Russia’s 
sphere of influence. And they had sought a warm-water port on the 
Mediterranean, mandating control of the Black Sea Straits. 

At bottom of Kremlin’s neurotic view of world affairs is traditional and 
instinctive Russian sense of insecurity. Originally, this was insecurity of 
a peaceful, agricultural people trying to live on vast exposed plain in 
neighborhood of fierce nomadic peoples. To this was added, as Russia 
came into contact with economically advanced West, fear of more com- 
petent, more powerful, more highly organized societies in that area. 
But this latter type of insecurity was one which afflicted rather Russian 
rulers than Russian people; for Russian rulers have invariably sensed 
that their rule was relatively archaic in form, fragile and artificial in its 
psychological foundation, unable to stand comparison or contact with 
political systems of Western countries. For this reason they have always 
feared foreign penetration, feared direct contact between Western 
world and their own, feared what would happen if Russians learned 
truth about world without or if foreigners learned truth about world 
within. And they have learned to seek security only in patient but deadly 


448 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


struggle for total destruction of rival power, never in compacts and 
compromises with it. 3 

Such, argued Kennan, were Soviet purposes, and no amount of American 
cajoling was going to change them. America, Kennan argued, had to 
hunker down for a long struggle; the goals and philosophies of the United 
States and of the Soviet Union were irreconcilable. 

The first systematic exposition of the new approach appeared in a State 
Department memorandum submitted to an interagency committee on 
April 1, 1946. Drafted by State Department official H. Freeman Matthews, 
it attempted to translate Kennan’s essentially philosophical observations 
into operational foreign policy. For the first time, an American policy 
paper treated disputes with the Soviet Union as an endemic feature of the 
Soviet system. Moscow had to be convinced “in the first instance by 
diplomatic means and in the last analysis by military force if necessary 
that the present course of its foreign policy can only lead to disaster for 
the Soviet Union.” 4 

Did these bold words, put forward less than a year after the end of the 
Second World War, imply that the United States would defend every 
threatened area around the vast Soviet periphery? Matthews recoiled be- 
fore his own daring and added two qualifications. America, he argued, 
dominated the sea and the air; the Soviet Union was supreme on land. 
Calling attention to “our military ineffectiveness within the land mass of 
Eurasia,” the Matthews memorandum limited the use of force to those 
areas where the power of “Soviet armies can be countered defensively 
by the naval, amphibious and air power of the U.S. and its potential 
allies.” 5 The second qualification warned against unilateral action: “The 
Charter of the United Nations affords the best and most unassailable 
means through which the U.S. can implement its opposition to Soviet 
physical expansion.” 6 

But where could these two conditions be fulfilled? The Matthews paper 
stipulated the following countries or territories as being at risk: “Finland, 
Scandinavia, Eastern, Central and South Eastern Europe, Iran, Iraq, Tur- 
key, Afghanistan, Sinkiang, and Manchuria.” 7 The trouble was that none of 
them was within range of relevant American power. Illustrating America’s 
continued overestimation of Great Britain’s capabilities, the memoran- 
dum appealed to it to perform the very role of balancer which American 
leaders had so strenuously opposed only a few years earlier (see chapter 
16): 

If Soviet Russia is to be denied the hegemony of Europe, the United 
Kingdom must continue in existence as the principal power in Western 


449 



Diplomacy 


Europe economically and militarily. The U.S. should, therefore . . . give 
all feasible political, economic, and if necessary military support within 
the framework of the United Nations, to the United Kingdom — 8 

The Matthews memorandum did not explain in what way Great Britain’s 
strategic reach exceeded that of the United States. 

The second qualification was no easier to fulfill. In its short and futile 
lifespan, the League of Nations had shown the near-impossibility of or- 
ganizing collective action against a major power. Yet the country desig- 
nated by the Matthews paper as posing the principal security threat was a 
member of the United Nations and had a veto. If the United Nations would 
not act and the United States could not act, Great Britain’s purported role 
was only a stopgap. 

Clark Clifford, in one of his first assignments in a long and distin- 
guished career as a presidential adviser, removed the ambiguities and 
limitations of the Matthews memorandum. In a Top Secret study dated 
September 24, 1946, Clifford fell in with the view that the Kremlin’s 
policies could only be reversed if Soviet power was counterbalanced: 
“The main deterrent to Soviet attack on the United States, or to attack on 
areas of the world which are vital to our security, will be the military 
power of this country.” 9 

By now, this had become conventional wisdom. But Clifford used it as a 
springboard from which to proclaim a global American security mission, 
embracing “ all democratic countries which are in any way menaced 
or endangered by the U.S.S.R.” 10 It was not clear what was meant by 
“democratic.” Did this qualification limit America’s defense to Western 
Europe, or was it a courtesy that extended to any threatened area and 
thus required the United States to defend simultaneously the jungles of 
Southeast Asia, the deserts of the Middle East, and densely populated 
Central Europe? In time, the latter interpretation became dominant. 

Clifford rejected any similarity between the emerging policy of contain- 
ment and traditional diplomacy. In his view, the Soviet-American conflict 
was not caused by clashing national interests — which by definition might 
be negotiated — but by the moral shortcomings of the Soviet leadership. 
Therefore, the goal of American policy was not so much to restore the 
balance of power as to transform Soviet society. Just as in 1917 Wilson 
had blamed the need for a declaration of war on the Kaiser rather than on 
the threat Germany posed to American security, so Clifford now ascribed 
Soviet-American tensions to “a small ruling clique and not the Soviet 
people.” 11 A significant Soviet change of heart, and probably a new set 
of Soviet leaders, was required before an overall Soviet-American 


450 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


agreement would be possible. At some dramatic moment, these new 
leaders would “work out with us a fair and equitable settlement when 
they realize that we are too strong to be beaten and too determined to 
be frightened.” 12 

Neither Clifford nor any subsequent American statesman involved in 
the discussion of the Cold War ever put forward specific terms to end the 
confrontation or to initiate a process that would bring about negotiations 
to do so. So long as the Soviet Union maintained its ideology, negotiations 
were treated as pointless. After a Soviet change of heart, a settlement 
would become nearly automatic. In either case, spelling out the terms of 
such a settlement in advance was deemed to inhibit America’s freedom 
of action — the same argument that had been used during World War II 
to avoid discussion of the postwar world. 

America now had the conceptual framework to justify practical resis- 
tance to Soviet expansionism. Since the end of the war, Soviet pressures 
had followed historic Russian patterns. The Soviet Union controlled the 
Balkans (except for Yugoslavia) and a guerrilla w T ar was raging in Greece, 
supported from bases in communist Yugoslavia and the Bulgarian Soviet 
satellite. Territorial demands were being made against Turkey, along with 
a request for Soviet bases in the Straits — very much along the lines of the 
demands Stalin had made to Hitler on November 25, 1940 (see chapter 
14). 

Ever since the end of the war, Great Britain had supported both Greece 
and Turkey, economically as well as militarily. In the winter of 
1946-47, the Attlee government informed Washington that it could no 
longer shoulder the burden. Truman was prepared to take over Great 
Britain’s historic role of blocking a Russian advance toward the Mediterra- 
nean, but neither the American public nor the Congress could counte- 
nance the traditional British geopolitical rationale. Resistance to Soviet 
expansionism had to spring from principles based strictly on the Ameri- 
can approach to foreign policy. 

This imperative became apparent at a key meeting held on February 
27, 1947, in the Oval Office. Truman, Secretary of State Marshall, and 
Assistant Secretary Dean Acheson sought to persuade a Congressional 
delegation led by Michigan Republican Senator Arthur Vandenberg of the 
importance of aid to Greece and Turkey — a formidable assignment, since 
the traditionally isolationist Republicans controlled both houses of the 
Congress. 

Marshall led off with a dispassionate analysis setting forth the relation- 
ship between the proposed aid program and American interests. He elic- 
ited stereotypic grumblings about “pulling Britain’s chestnuts out of the 


451 



Diplomacy 


fire,” the iniquities of the balance of power, and the burdens of foreign 
aid. Recognizing that the Administration was about to lose its case, 
Acheson asked Marshall in a whisper whether this was a private fight or 
whether anyone could join in. Given the floor, Acheson proceeded, in 
the words of one aide, u to pull out all the stops.” Acheson boldly pre- 
sented the group with visions of a bleak future in which the forces of 
communism stood to gain the upper hand: 

Only two great powers remained in the world United States and the 

Soviet Union. We had arrived at a situation unparalleled since ancient 
times. Not since Rome and Carthage had there been such a polarization 

of power on this earth For the United States to take steps to 

strengthen countries threatened with Soviet aggression or Communist 
subversion . . . was to protect the security of the United States — it was 
to protect freedom itself. 13 

When it became evident that Acheson had roused the delegation, the 
Administration stuck to his basic approach. From that point on, the Greek- 
Turkish aid program was portrayed as part of the global struggle between 
democracy and dictatorship. When, on March 12, 1947, Truman an- 
nounced the doctrine that would later be named after him, he dropped 
the strategic aspect of Acheson s analysis and spoke in traditional Wilson- 
ian terms of a struggle between two ways of life: 

One way of life is based upon the will of the majority, and is distin- 
guished by free institutions, representative government, free elections, 
guarantees of individual liberty, freedom of speech and religion, and 
freedom from political oppression. The second way of life is based 
upon the will of a minority forcibly imposed upon the majority. It 
relies upon terror and oppression, a controlled press and radio, fixed 
elections, and the suppression of personal freedoms. 14 

Moreover, in defending independent countries, the United States was 
acting on behalf of democracy and the world community, even though a 
Soviet veto would prevent formal endorsement by the United Nations: 
“In helping free and independent nations to maintain their freedom, the 
United States will be giving effect to the principles of the Charter of the 
United Nations.” 15 

Had Soviet leaders been more aware of American history, they would 
have understood the ominous nature of what the President was saying. 
The Truman Doctrine marked a watershed because, once America had 
thrown down the moral gauntlet, the kind of Realpolitik Stalin under- 


452 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


stood best would be forever at an end, and bargaining over reciprocal 
concessions would be out of the question. Henceforth, the conflict could 
only be settled by a change in Soviet purposes, by the collapse of the 
Soviet system, or both. 

Truman had proclaimed his doctrine as “the policy of the United States 
to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by 
armed minorities or by outside pressures.” 16 Inevitably, criticism of the 
objective of defending democracy appeared at both ends of the intellec- 
tual spectrum: some protested that America was defending countries 
which, however important, were morally unworthy; others objected that 
America was committing itself to the defense of societies which, whether 
free or not, were not vital to American security. It was an ambiguity which 
refused to go away, generating debates about American purposes in 
nearly every crisis that have not ended to this day. Ever since, American 
foreign policy has been obliged to navigate between those who assail it 
for being amoral and those who criticize it for going beyond the national 
interest through crusading moralism. 

Once the challenge had been defined as the very future of democracy, 
America could not wait until a civil war actually occurred, as it had in 
Greece; it was in the national character to attempt the cure. On June 5, 
less than three months after the announcement of the Truman Doctrine, 
Secretary Marshall, in a commencement address at Harvard, did just that 
when he committed America to the task of eradicating the social and 
economic conditions that tempted aggression. America would aid Euro- 
pean recovery, announced Marshall, to avoid “political disturbances’' and 
“desperation,” to restore the world economy, and to nurture free institu- 
tions. Therefore, “ any government that is willing to assist in the task of 
recovery will find full cooperation, I am sure, on the part of the United 
States Government.” 17 In other words, participation in the Marshall Plan 
was open even to governments in the Soviet orbit — a hint taken up in 
Warsaw and Prague and just as quickly squelched by Stalin. 

Anchored to a platform of social and economic reform, the United 
States announced that it would oppose not only any government but any 
organization that impeded the process of European recovery. Marshall 
defined these as the Communist Party and its front organizations: “. . . gov- 
ernments, political parties, or groups which seek to perpetuate human 
misery in order to profit therefrom politically or otherwise will encounter 
the opposition of the United States.” 18 

Only a country as idealistic, as pioneering, and as relatively inexperi- 
enced as the United States could have advanced a plan for global eco- 
nomic recovery based solely on its own resources. And yet the very sweep 


453 



Diplomacy 


of that vision elicited a national commitment which would sustain the 
generation of the Cold War through its final victory. The program of 
economic recovery, said Secretary Marshall, would be “directed not 
against any country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation 
and chaos.” 19 Just as when the Atlantic Charter had been proclaimed, a 
global crusade against hunger and despair was found to be more persua- 
sive to Americans than appeals to immediate self-interest or the balance 
of power. 

At the end of all of these more or less random initiatives, there 
emerged a document which would, for over a generation, serve as the 
bible of the containment policy, indeed which supplied it with its very 
name. All the various strands of American postwar thought were brought 
together in an extraordinary article published in July 1947 in Foreign 
Affairs. Though it was anonymously signed by “X,” the author was later 
identified as George F. Kennan, by then head of the Policy Planning Staff 
of the State Department. Of the thousands of articles written since the 
end of the Second World War, Kennan’s “The Sources of Soviet Conduct” 
stands in a class by itself. In this lucidly written, passionately argued, 
and literary adaptation of his ‘‘Long Telegram,” Kennan raised the Soviet 
challenge to the level of philosophy of history. 

By the time Kennan’s article appeared, Soviet intransigence had be- 
come the staple of policy documents. Kennan’s distinctive contribution 
was to explain the ways in which hostility to the democracies was inher- 
ent in the Soviet domestic structure, and why that structure would prove 
impervious to conciliatory Western policies. 

Tension with the outside world was inherent in the very nature of 
communist philosophy and, above all, in the way the Soviet system was 
being run domestically. Internally, the Party was the only organized 
group, with the rest of society fragmented into an inchoate mass. Thus the 
Soviet Union’s implacable hostility to the outside world was an attempt to 
gear international affairs to its own internal rhythm. The main concern of 
Soviet policy was 

to make sure that it has filled every nook and cranny available to it in 
the basin of world power. But if it finds unassailable barriers in its path, 
it accepts these philosophically and accommodates itself to them — 
There is no trace of any feeling in Soviet psychology that that goal must 
be reached at any given time. 20 

The way to defeat Soviet strategy was by “a policy of firm containment, 
designed to confront the Russians with unalterable counter-force at every 


454 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


point where they show signs of encroaching upon the interests of a 
peaceful and stable world .” 21 

Like almost every other contemporary foreign policy document, Ken- 
nan’s “X” article disdained the elaboration of a precise diplomatic goal. 
What he sketched was the age-old American dream of a peace achieved 
by the conversion of the adversary, albeit in language more elevated and 
far more trenchant in its perception than that of any contemporary. But 
where Kennan differed from other experts was that he described the 
mechanism by which, sooner or later, through one power struggle or 
another, the Soviet system would be fundamentally transformed. Since 
that system had never managed a “legitimate” transfer of power, Kennan 
thought it likely that, at some point, various contestants for authority 
might 


reach down into these politically immature and inexperienced masses 
in order to find support for their respective claims. If this were ever to 
happen, strange consequences could flow for the Communist Party: for 
the membership at large has been exercised only in the practices of 
iron discipline and obedience and not in the arts of compromise and 

accommodation If, consequently, anything were ever to occur to 

disrupt the unity and efficacy of the Party as a political instrument, 
Soviet Russia might be changed overnight from one of the strongest to 
one of the weakest and most pitiable of national societies . 22 


No other document forecast quite so accurately what would in fact take 
place after the advent of Mikhail Gorbachev. And in the aftermath of so 
total a collapse of the Soviet Union, it may seem carping to point out just 
how back-breaking an assignment Kennan had prescribed for his people. 
For he had charged America with combatting Soviet pressures for the 
indefinite future all around a vast periphery that embraced the cultures 
of Asia, the Middle East, and Europe. The Kremlin was, moreover, free to 
select its point of attack, presumably only where it calculated it would 
have the greatest advantage. Throughout subsequent crises, the American 
political objective was deemed to be the preservation of the status quo , 
with the overall effort producing communism’s final collapse only after a 
protracted series of ostensibly inconclusive conflicts. It was surely the 
ultimate expression of America’s national optimism and unimpaired 
sense of self-confidence that as sophisticated an observer as George Ken- 
nan could have assigned his society a role so global, so stern, and, at the 
same time, so reactive. 

This stark, even heroic, doctrine of perpetual struggle committed the 


455 



Diplomacy 


American people to endless contests with rules which left the initiative to 
the adversary and confined America’s role to strengthening the countries 
already on its side of the dividing line — a classic policy of spheres of 
interest. By abjuring negotiations, the containment policy wasted precious 
time during the period of America’s greatest relative strength — while it 
still had the atomic monopoly. Indeed, given the premise of containment 
— that positions of strength had yet to be built — the Cold War became 
both militarized and imbued with an inaccurate impression of the West’s 
relative weakness. 

The redemption of the Soviet Union thus became the ultimate goal of 
policy; stability could emerge only after evil had been exorcised. It was 
no accident that Kennan’s article concluded with a peroration instructing 
his impatient, peace-loving compatriots about the virtues of patience and 
interpreting their international role as a test of their country’s worthiness: 

The issue of Soviet-American relations is in essence a test of the over- 
all worth of the United States as a nation among nations — [T]he 
thoughtful observer of Russian-American relations will find no cause 
for complaint in the Kremlin’s challenge to American society. He will 
rather experience a certain gratitude to a Providence which, by provid- 
ing the American people with this implacable challenge, has made 
their entire security as a nation dependent on their pulling themselves 
together and accepting the responsibilities of moral and political lead- 
ership that history plainly intended them to bear . 23 

One of the outstanding features of these noble sentiments was their 
peculiar ambivalence. They rallied America to a global mission but made 
the task so complex that America would nearly tear itself apart trying to 
fulfill it. Yet the very ambivalence of containment seemed to lend an 
extraordinary impetus to American policy. Though essentially passive 
with respect to diplomacy with the Soviet Union, containment evoked 
tenacious creativity when it came to building “positions of strength” in 
the military and economic realms. This was because merged in contain- 
ment were the lessons and beliefs derived from the two most important 
American experiences of the previous generation: from the New Deal 
came the belief that threats to political stability arise primarily from gaps 
between economic and social expectations and reality, hence the Marshall 
Plan; from the Second World War America learned that the best protec- 
tion against aggression is having overwhelming power and the willing- 
ness to use it, hence the Atlantic Alliance. The Marshall Plan was designed 
to get Europe on its feet economically The North Atlantic Treaty Organi- 
zation (NATO) was to look after its security. 


456 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


NATO was the first peacetime military alliance in American history. The 
immediate impetus for it was the communist coup in Czechoslovakia in 
February 1948. After the Marshall Plan was announced, Stalin accelerated 
communist control over Eastern Europe. He became rigid, if not para- 
noid, about the East European countries’ fealty to Moscow. Lifelong com- 
munist leaders suspected of harboring the slightest national feelings were 
purged. In Czechoslovakia, the communists had emerged as the strongest 
party in free elections and controlled the government. Even that was 
not enough for Stalin. The elected government was overthrown and the 
noncommunist Foreign Minister, Jan Masaryk, the son of the founder of 
the Czechoslovak Republic, fell to his death from his office window after 
being almost certainly pushed by communist thugs. A communist dicta- 
torship was established in Prague. 

For the second time within a decade, Prague became the symbol 
around which resistance to totalitarianism was organized. Just as the Nazi 
occupation of Prague had been the final straw that caused Great Britain 
to draw the line in 1939, the communist coup nine years later led the 
United States and the democracies of Western Europe to unite in resisting 
the imposition of a similar fete on any other European country. 

The brutality of the Czech coup reawakened fears that the Soviets might 
sponsor other, similar takeovers — for example, by fostering a communist 
coup d’etat recognizing a new communist government and using military 
muscle to prop it up. Thus, in April 1948, several Western European 
countries formed the Pact of Brussels — a defensive pact designed to repel 
any forcible attempts to topple democratic governments. However, every 
analysis of the relative power positions indicated that Western Europe 
simply did not have sufficient strength to repel a Soviet attack. Thus, the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization came into being as a way of tying 
America to the defense of Western Europe. NATO provided for an unprec- 
edented departure in American foreign policy: American, along with Ca- 
nadian, forces joined Western European armies under an international 
NATO command. The result was a confrontation between two military 
alliances, and two spheres of influence along the entire length of the 
dividing line in Central Europe. 

This was not, however, the way the process was perceived in America. 
Wilsonianism was too powerful to permit America to call any arrange- 
ment protecting the territorial status quo in Europe an alliance. Every 
spokesman of the Truman Administration therefore went to great lengths 
to distinguish NATO from anything resembling a traditional coalition to 
protect the balance of power. Considering their oft-repeated goal of creat- 
ing “positions of strength,” this required a good deal of ingenuity. Admin- 


457 



Diplomacy 


istration spokesmen proved equal to the task. When Warren Austin, a 
former senator who became Ambassador to the United Nations, testified 
on behalf of NATO before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 
April 1949, he took care of the problem by pronouncing the balance of 
power dead: 

The old veteran, balance of power, was given a blue discharge when 
the United Nations was formed. The undertaking of the peoples of 
the United Nations to combine their efforts through the international 
organization to maintain international peace and security, and to that 
end, to take effective collective measures, introduced formally the ele- 
ment of preponderance of power for peace. And out went old man 
balance of power. 24 

The Senate Committee on Foreign Relations happily accepted this con- 
ceit. Most of the witnesses testifying on behalf of the Atlantic Alliance 
borrowed heavily from a State Department document entitled “Differ- 
ence Between the North Atlantic Treaty and Traditional Military Alli- 
ances.” 25 This extraordinary document purported to be a historical survey 
of seven alliances dating back to the early nineteenth century, from the 
Holy Alliance of 1815 to the 1939 Nazi- Soviet Pact. Its conclusion was that 
the North Atlantic Treaty differed from them all, “both in letter and in 
spirit.” Whereas “most” traditional alliances “piously” denied “aggressive 
or expansionist intentions,” they frequently had other than defensive 
ends. 

Amazingly, the State Department document asserted that NATO was not 
designed to defend the status quo in Europe, which was surely news to 
America’s allies. The Atlantic Alliance upheld principle, it was said, not 
territory; it did not resist change, only the use of force to bring about 
change. The State Department analysis concluded that the North Atlantic 
Treaty “is directed against no one; it is directed solely against aggression. 
It seeks not to influence any shifting ‘balance of power’ but to strengthen 
the ‘balance of principle.’ ” The document hailed both the Atlantic Treaty 
and its contemporary, the Rio Pact for defense of the Western Hemi- 
sphere, as “developments in the concept of collective security” and en- 
dorsed the pronouncement of the chairman of the Senate Committee, 
Tom Connally, that the Treaty constituted not a military alliance but “an 
alliance against war itself.” 26 

No history graduate student would have received a passing grade for 
such an analysis. Historically, alliances rarely named the countries against 
which they were aimed. Instead, they described the conditions which had 


458 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


to be met to bring the alliance into play — just as the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization did. Since in 1949 the Soviet Union was the sole potential 
aggressor in Europe, it was even less necessary to name names than it 
had been in the past. The insistence that the United States was defending 
principle and not territory was quintessential^ American, though hardly 
reassuring to countries whose greatest fear was Soviet territorial expan- 
sion. The argument that America was resisting change incurred by force 
and not change as such was equally boilerplate and equally disquieting; 
in all of Europe’s long history, it was not possible to enumerate many, if 
any, territorial changes which had been the result of anything other than 
force. 

Nevertheless, few State Department documents have ever been greeted 
with such unreserved approval by the normally wary Senate Committee 
on Foreign Relations as this one was. Senator Connally was relentless in 
his promotion of the Administration’s theme that the intent of NATO was 
to resist the concept of aggression, not any specific nation. An excerpt 
from the testimony of Secretary of State Dean Acheson attests to Con- 
nally’s unquenchable enthusiasm: 

the chairman [Senator Connally]: Now, Mr. Secretary, you brought out 
rather clearly — it won’t hurt to reiterate it a little — that this treaty is not 
aimed at any nation particularly. It is aimed only at any nation or any 
country that contemplates or undertakes armed aggression against the 
members of the signatory powers. Is that true? 

secretary acheson: That is correct, Senator Connally. It is not aimed at 
any country; it is aimed solely at armed aggression. 
the chairman.- In other words, unless a nation other than the signatories 
contemplates, meditates or makes plans looking toward, aggression or 
armed attack on another nation, it has no cause to fear this treaty. 
secretary acheson: That is correct, Senator Connally, and it seems to 
me that any nation which claims that this treaty is directed against it 
should be reminded of the Biblical admonition that “The guilty flee 
when no man pursueth.” 27 

Once the Committee got into the spirit of the subject, it practically testi- 
fied on behalf of all of the other witnesses — as, for example, during this 
exchange with Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson: 

the chairman: As a matter of fact, this treaty is not a general military 
alliance in any sense. It is limited to defense against armed attack. 
secretary Johnson: That is right, sir. 

the chairman: It is the very opposite of the military alliance. 


459 



Diplomacy 


senator tydings: Defensive entirely. 

the chairman: Defensive entirely. It is an alliance of peace, if you want 
to call it an alliance. 

secretary johnson: I like your language. 

the chairman: It is an alliance against armed attack, it is an alliance 
against war, and does not partake of the essentials of the primary obliga- 
tions of a military alliance as we know military alliances at all; is that 
true? 

secretary johnson: That is right, sir . 28 


In short, the Atlantic Alliance, not really being an alliance, possessed a 
claim to moral universality. It represented the majority of the world 
against the minority of troublemakers. In a sense, the role of the Atlantic 
Alliance was to act until such time as the United Nations Security Council 
“has taken the measures necessary to restore peace and security .” 29 

Dean Acheson was a uniquely sophisticated Secretary of State who 
knew his history. One can imagine the sardonic gleam in his eye as he let 
the chairman of the Committee put him through his catechism. Acheson 
had a clear sense of the requirements of the balance of power, as evi- 
denced by many subtle analyses of geostrategic issues . 30 But he was also 
sufficiently American in his approach to diplomacy to be convinced that, 
left to its own devices, Europe had made a mess of the balance of power, 
and that, for the concept of equilibrium to have meaning for Americans, 
it needed to be embedded in some loftier ideal. In a speech to the 
Harvard Alumni Association well after the ratification of the treaty, 
Acheson was still defending the Atlantic Alliance in characteristically 
American fashion — as a novel approach to international affairs: 

... it has advanced international cooperation to maintain the peace, to 
advance human rights, to raise standards of living, and to promote 
respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peo- 
ples . 31 

In short, America would do anything for the Atlantic Alliance except call 
it an alliance. It would practice a historic policy of coalition so long as its 
actions could be justified by the doctrine of collective security, which 
Wilson had first put forward as the alternative to the alliance system. 
Thus the European balance of power was being resurrected in uniquely 
American rhetoric. 

As important as the Atlantic Alliance, though less noticed by the Ameri- 
can public, was the creation of the Federal Republic of Germany by 


460 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


merging the American, British, and French zones of occupation. On the 
one hand, this new state meant that the handiwork of Bismarck was 
being undone, because, for the indefinite future, Germany would remain 
divided. On the other hand, the existence of the Federal Republic implied 
a continuing challenge to the Soviet presence in Central Europe since the 
Federal Republic would never accept the communist East German Soviet 
state (which the Soviets had created out of their zone of occupation). For 
two decades, the Federal Republic refused to recognize what came to be 
called the German Democratic Republic and threatened to break diplo- 
matic relations with any country that did recognize it. After 1970, the 
Federal Republic abandoned the so-called Hallstein Doctrine and estab- 
lished diplomatic relations with the East German satellite, though without 
ever giving up its claim to speak on behalf of the entire German popula- 
tion. 

The decisiveness with which America threw itself into filling the power 
vacuum in Europe surprised even the most earnest supporters of the 
containment policy. “I little thought,” Churchill later reflected, “at the end 
of 19 44 that the State Department, supported by overwhelming American 
opinion, would in little more than two years hot only adopt and carry on 
the course we had opened, but would make vehement and costly exer- 
tions, even of a military character, to bring it to fruition.” 32 

Four years after the unconditional surrender of the Axis Powers, the 
international order contained many similarities to that of the period just 
before the First World War: two rigid alliances with very little diplomatic 
maneuvering room between them faced each other, this time all around 
the globe. There was, however, at least one crucial difference: the pre- 
World War I alliances had been held together by each side’s fear that a 
switch in alliances by one of the partners could unravel the edifice with 
which they had identified their security. In effect, the most bellicose 
partner was permitted to pull the others toward the abyss. During the 
Cold War, each side was dominated by a superpower sufficiently in- 
dispensable and sufficiently reluctant to run risks to keep every ally 
from plunging the world into war. And the presence of nuclear weapons 
prevented the illusion of July 1914 — that war could be short and pain- 
less. 

American leadership of the Alliance guaranteed that the new interna- 
tional order would be justified in moral, and occasionally even messianic, 
terms. America’s leaders made exertions and sacrifices unprecedented in 
peacetime coalitions on behalf of appeals to fundamental values and 
comprehensive solutions, instead of the calculations of national security 
and equilibrium that had characterized European diplomacy. 


461 



Diplomacy 


Later, critics would emphasize the alleged cynicism of that moral rheto- 
ric. But no one acquainted with the authors of the containment policy 
could doubt their sincerity. Nor could America have sustained four 
decades of grueling exertion on behalf of a policy which did not reflect 
its deepest values and ideals. This is amply demonstrated by the degree 
to which moral values suffused even the most highly classified govern- 
ment documents, which were never intended for release to the general 
public. 

A case in point is a National Security Council document (NSC-68) pro- 
duced in April 1950, which was to serve as Americas official statement on 
Cold War strategy. NSC-68 defined the national interest largely in terms 
of moral principle. In its view, moral setbacks were even more dangerous 
than material ones: 

... a defeat of free institutions anywhere is a defeat everywhere. The 
shock we sustained in the destruction of Czechoslovakia was not in the 
measure of Czechoslovakia’s material importance to us. In a material 
sense, her capabilities were already at Soviet disposal. But when the 
integrity of Czechoslovak institutions was destroyed, it was in the intan- 
gible scale of values that we registered a loss more damaging than the 
material loss we had already suffered. 33 

Once vital interests had been equated with moral principle, America’s 
strategic objectives were cast in terms of worthiness rather than of power 
— to ‘make ourselves strong, both in the way we affirm our values in the 
conduct of our national life, and in the development of our political and 
economic strength.” 34 The doctrine of America’s Founding Fathers, that 
their nation was a beacon of liberty for all mankind, permeated American 
Cold War philosophy. Rejecting the strand of American thinking ex- 
pressed in John Quincy Adams’ warning against “going abroad in search 
of monsters to destroy,” the drafters of NSC-68 opted for the alterna- 
tive vision of America as crusader: “It is only by practical affirmation, 
abroad as well as at home, of our essential values, that we can preserve > 

our own integrity, in which lies the real frustration of the Kremlin 
design.” 35 

In these terms, the purpose of the Cold War was the conversion of the 
adversary: “to foster a fundamental change in the nature of the Soviet 
system,” which was defined as “Soviet acceptance of the specific and 
limited conditions requisite to an international environment in which 
free institutions can flourish, and in which the Russian peoples will have 
a new chance to work out their own destiny.” 36 


462 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


Though NSC-68 went on to describe various military and economic 
measures vital to building situations of strength, its central theme was 
neither the give-and-take of traditional diplomacy nor an apocalyptic final 
showdown. The reluctance to use or to threaten to use nuclear weapons 
during the period of America’s atomic monopoly was rationalized in a 
uniquely American way: victory in any such war would produce a tran- 
sitional, hence an unsatisfactory, outcome. As for a negotiated solution, 

. . the only conceivable basis for a general settlement would be spheres 
of influence and of no influence — a ‘settlement’ which the Kremlin could 
readily exploit to its great advantage.” 37 In other words, America refused 
to consider winning a war or even a comprehensive solution which 
would leave the adversary unconverted. 

For all of its ostensibly hardheaded realism, NSC-68 began with a per- 
oration on democracy and concluded with the assertion that history 
would ultimately work in America’s favor. What was unique about this 
document was its coupling of universal claims with the renunciation of 
force. Never before had a Great Power expressed objectives quite so 
demanding of its own resources without any expectation of reciprocity 
other than the dissemination of its national values. And these would be 
achieved through global reform, not global conquest, the usual path of 
crusaders. It so happened that for this endeavor American strength was, 
for a brief moment, unprecedentedly supreme, despite the fact that 
America had convinced itself that it was relatively weak militarily. 

In those early stages of America’s journey into containment, no one 
could have imagined the impending strain on the American psyche of 
conflicts whose principal goal was the internal transformation of the ad- 
versary, and which lacked any criteria that could be used to assess the 
success of each intermediate step. It would have seemed incredible to all 
those self-confident American leaders that their country would, within 
two decades, have to navigate a passage of searing self-doubt and domes- 
tic conflict before their prediction of the collapse of communism would 
be fulfilled. For the time being, they were fully occupied with committing 
America to its new international role while fending off criticisms of the 
revolutionary turn America’s foreign policy was taking. 

As containment slowly took shape, the criticism it encountered 
emerged from three different schools of thought. The first came from the 
“realists” exemplified by Walter Lippmann, who argued that the contain- 
ment policy led to psychological and geopolitical overextension while 
draining American resources. The spokesman for the second school of 
thought was Winston Churchill, who objected to the postponement of 
negotiations until after positions of strength had been achieved. 


463 



Diplomacy 


Churchill’s argument was that the West’s position would never again be 
as strong as it was at the beginning of what came to be known as the 
Cold War, and that its relative bargaining position could therefore only 
deteriorate. Finally, there was Henry Wallace, who denied America the 
moral right to undertake the policy of containment in the first place. 
Postulating a fundamental moral equivalence between both sides, Wallace 
argued that the Soviet sphere of influence in Central Europe was legiti- 
mate and that America’s resistance to it only intensified tension. He urged 
a return to what he viewed as Roosevelt’s policy: to end the Cold War by 
a unilateral American decision. 

As the most eloquent spokesman for the realists, Walter Lippmann 
rejected Kennan’s proposition that Soviet society contained the seeds of 
its own decay. He considered the theory to be too speculative to serve as 
the foundation of American policy: 

In Mr. X’s estimates there are no reserves for a rainy day. There is no 
margin of safety for bad luck, bad management, error and the unfore- 
seen. He asks us to assume that the Soviet power is already decaying. 

He exhorts us to believe that our own highest hopes for ourselves will 
soon have been realized . 38 

Containment, argued Lippmann, would draw America into the hinterlands 
of the Soviet Empire’s extended periphery, which included, in his view, 
many countries that were not states to begin with in the modern sense. 
Military entanglements that far from home could not enhance American 
security and would weaken American resolve. Containment, according to 
Lippmann, permitted the Soviet Union to choose the points of maximum 
discomfiture for the United States while retaining the diplomatic, and 
even the military, initiative. 

Lippmann stressed the importance of establishing criteria to define 
areas in which countering Soviet expansion was a vital American interest. 
Without such criteria, the United States would be forced to organize a 
“heterogeneous array of satellites, clients, dependents, and puppets,” 
which would permit America’s newfound allies to exploit containment 
for their own purposes. The United States would be trapped into prop- 
ping up nonviable regimes, leaving Washington with the sorry choice 
between “appeasement and defeat and the loss of face, or . . . supportfing] 
them [U.S. allies] at incalculable cost .” 39 

It was indeed a prophetic analysis of what lay ahead for the United 
States, though the remedy Lippmann proposed was hardly congenial to 
the universalist American tradition, which was far closer to Kennan’s 


464 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


expectation of an apocalyptic outcome. Lippmann asked that American 
foreign policy be guided by a case-by-case analysis of American interests 
rather than by general principles presumed to be universally applicable. 
In his view, American policy should have been aiming less at overthrow- 
ing the communist system than at restoring the balance of power in 
Europe, which had been destroyed by the war. Containment implied the 
indefinite division of Europe, whereas America’s real interest should be 
to banish Soviet power from the center of the European Continent: 


For more than a hundred years all Russian governments have sought to 
expand over eastern Europe. But only since the Red Army reached the 
Elbe River have the rulers of Russia been able to realize the ambitions 
of the Russian Empire and the ideological purposes of communism. A 
genuine policy would, therefore, have as its paramount objective a 

settlement which brought about the evacuation of Europe American 

power must be available, not to “contain” the Russians at scattered 
points, but to hold the whole Russian military machine in check, and to 
exert a mounting pressure in support of a diplomatic policy which has 
as its concrete objective a settlement that means withdrawal . 40 


Destiny was surely profligate in the talent it bestowed on America in the 
immediate postwar period. American political leaders were distinguished 
and experienced men. And behind them stood a reservoir of such emi- 
nent personalities as John McCloy, Robert Lovett, David Bruce, Ellsworth 
Bunker, Averell Harriman, and John Foster Dulles, rotating in and out of 
government and always available to serve the president on a nonpartisan 
basis. 

From among its intellectuals, America was able to draw on the thinking 
of both Lippmann and Kennan while they were at the height of their 
powers. Kennan correctly understood communism’s underlying weak- 
ness; Lippmann accurately foretold the frustrations of an essentially reac- 
tive foreign policy based on containment. Kennan called for endurance 
to permit history to display its inevitable tendencies; Lippmann called 
for diplomatic initiative to produce a European settlement while Amer- 
ica was still preponderant. Kennan had a better intuitive understand- 
ing of the mainsprings of American society; Lippmann, on the other hand, 
grasped the impending strain of enduring a seemingly endless stalemate 
and of the ambiguous causes which containment might lead America to 
support. 

In the end, Lippmann’s analysis found a substantial following, though 
mainly among the opponents of confrontation with the Soviet Union. And 


465 



Diplomacy 


their approbation was based on only one aspect of Lippmann’s argument, 
emphasizing as they did its critique while ignoring its prescriptions. They 
noted Lippmann’s call for more limited objectives but overlooked his 
recommendation for a more offensive diplomacy. Thus it happened that 
in the 1940s the most compelling alternative strategy to the doctrine of 
containment came from none other than Winston Churchill, then the 
leader of the Opposition in Parliament. 

Churchill had been widely credited with inaugurating the Cold War 
when he delivered his Iron Curtain speech at Fulton, Missouri. At every 
stage of the Second World War, Churchill had sought to limit Soviet 
expansionism in an effort to bolster the democracies’ postwar bargaining 
position. Churchill supported containment, but for him it was never an 
end in itself Unwilling to wait passively for the collapse of communism, 
he sought to shape history rather than to rely on it to do his work for 
him. What he was after was a negotiated settlement. 

Churchill’s Fulton speech had merely hinted at negotiations. On Octo- 
ber 9, 1948, at Llandudno, Wales, Churchill returned to his argument that 
the West’s bargaining position would never be better than it was at that 
moment. In a much-neglected speech, he said: 

The question is asked: What will happen when they get the atomic 
bomb themselves and have accumulated a large store? You can judge 
yourselves what will happen then by what is happening now. If these 
things are done in the green wood, what will be done in the dry? . . . 

No one in his senses can believe that we have a limitless period of time 
before us. We ought to bring matters to a head and make a final settle- 
ment. We ought not to go jogging along improvident, incompetent, 
waiting for something to turn up, by which I mean waiting for some- 
thing bad for us to turn up. The Western Nations will be far more likely 
to reach a lasting settlement, without bloodshed, if they formulate their 
just demands while they have the atomic power and before the Russian 
Communists have got it too. 41 

Two years later, Churchill made the same plea in the House of Commons: 
the democracies were quite strong enough to negotiate, and would only 
weaken themselves by waiting. In a speech defending NATO rearmament 
on November 30, 1950, he warned that arming the West would not by 
itself change its bargaining position, which, in the end, depended on 
America’s atomic monopoly: 

. . . while it is right to build up our forces as fast as we can, nothing in 
this process, in the period I have mentioned, will deprive Russia of 


466 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


effective superiority in what are called now the conventional arms. All 
that it will do is to give us increasing unity in Europe and magnify the 

deterrents against aggression Therefore I am in favour of efforts 

to reach a settlement with Soviet Russia as soon as a suitable opportu- 
nity presents itself, and of making those efforts while the immense 
and measureless superiority of the United States atomic bomb organi- 
zation offsets the Soviet predominance in every 7 other military re- 
spect . 42 

For Churchill, a position of strength was already in place; for American 
leaders, it had yet to be created. Churchill thought of negotiations as a 
way of relating power to diplomacy. And though he was never specific, 
his public statements strongly suggest that he envisaged some kind of 
diplomatic ultimatum by the Western democracies. American leaders re- 
coiled before employing their atomic monopoly, even as a threat. 
Churchill wanted to shrink the area of Soviet influence, but was prepared 
to coexist with Soviet power within reduced limits. The American leaders 
had a nearly visceral dislike of spheres of influence. They wanted 
to destroy and not to shrink their adversary’s sphere. Their preference 
was to wait for total victory and for the collapse of communism, however 
far off, to bring about a Wilsonian solution to the problem of world 
order. 

The disagreement came down to a difference between the historical 
experiences of Great Britain and America. Churchill’s society was all too 
familiar with imperfect outcomes; Truman and his advisers came from a 
tradition in which, once a problem had been recognized, it was usually 
overcome by the deployment of vast resources. Hence America’s prefer- 
ence for final resolutions and its distrust of the sort of compromise that 
had become a British specialty. Churchill had no conceptual difficulty 
combining the building of positions of strength with an active diplomacy 
pressing for a settlement. American leaders thought of these efforts as 
successive phases — just as they had in World War II and would again in 
Korea and Vietnam. The American view prevailed, because America was 
stronger than Great Britain, and because Churchill, as the leader of the 
British Opposition, was in no position to press his strategy. 

In the end, the most vocal and persistent challenge to American policy 
came from neither the realist school of Lippmann nor Churchill’s balance- 
of-power thinking, but from a tradition with roots deep within American 
radical thought. Whereas Lippmann and Churchill accepted the Truman 
Administration’s premise that Soviet expansionism represented a serious 
challenge and only contested the strategy for resisting it, the radical critics 
rejected every aspect of containment. Henry Wallace, Vice-President dur- 


467 



Diplomacy 


ing Roosevelt’s third term, former Secretary of Agriculture, and Secretary 
of Commerce under Truman, was its principal spokesman. 

A product of America’s populist tradition, Wallace had an abiding Yan- 
kee distrust of Great Britain. Like most American liberals since Jefferson, 
he insisted that "the same moral principles which governed in private life 
also should govern in international affairs.” 43 In Wallace’s view, America 
had lost its moral compass and was practicing a foreign policy of "Machia- 
vellian principles of deceit, force and distrust,” as he told an audience in 
Madison Square Garden on September 12, 1946 44 Since prejudice, ha- 
tred, and fear were the root causes of international conflict, the United 
States had no moral right to intervene abroad until it had banished these 
scourges from its own society. 

The new radicalism reaffirmed the historic vision of America as a bea- 
con of liberty, but, in the process, turned it against itself. Postulating the 
moral equivalence of American and Soviet actions became a characteristic 
of the radical critique throughout the Cold War. The very idea of Amer- 
ica’s having international responsibilities was, in Wallace’s eyes, an exam- 
ple of the arrogance of power. The British, he argued, were duping the 
gullible Americans into doing their bidding: "British policy clearly is to 
provoke distrust between the United States and Russia and thus prepare 
the groundwork for World War III.” 45 

To Wallace, Truman’s presentation of the conflict as between democ- 
racy and dictatorship was pure fiction. In 1945, a time when Soviet post- 
war repression was becoming increasingly obvious and the brutality of 
collectivization was widely recognized, Wallace declared that "the Rus- 
sians today have more of the political freedoms than they ever had.” He 
also discovered "increasingly the signs of religious toleration” in the 
U.S.S.R. and claimed that there was a "basic lack of conflict between the 
United States and the Soviet Union.” 46 

Wallace thought that Soviet policy was driven less by expansionism 
than by fear. In March 1946, while still the Commerce Secretary, Wallace 
wrote to Truman: 

The events of the past few months have thrown the Soviets back to their 
pre-1939 fears of "capitalist encirclement” and to their erroneous belief 
that the Western World, including the U.S.A. is invariably and unani- 
mously hostile. 47 

In his speech at Madison Square Garden six months later, Wallace laid 
down a direct challenge to Truman, which caused the President to de- 
mand his resignation: 


468 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


We may not like what Russia does in Eastern Europe. Her type of land 
reform, industrial expropriation, and suppression of basic liberties 
offends the great majority of the people of the United States. But 
whether we like it or not the Russians will try to socialize their sphere 

of influence just as we try to democratize our sphere of influence 

Russian ideas of social-economic justice are going to govern nearly a 
third of the world. Our ideas of free enterprise democracy will govern 
much of the rest. The two ideas will endeavor to prove which can 
deliver the most satisfaction to the common man in their respective 
areas of political dominance. 48 

In a curious reversal of roles, the self-proclaimed defender of morality in 
foreign policy accepted a Soviet sphere of influence in Eastern Europe 
on practical grounds, while the Administration he was attacking for cyni- 
cal power politics rejected the Soviet sphere on moral grounds. 

According to Wallace, America had no right to intervene unilaterally 
around the globe. Defense was legitimate only with the approval of 
the United Nations (regardless that the Soviet Union had a veto there), 
and economic assistance should be distributed through international 
institutions. Since the Marshall Plan did not meet this test, Wallace 
predicted that it would ultimately earn America the enmity of man- 
kind. 49 

Wallace’s challenge collapsed after the communist coup in Czechoslo- 
vakia, the Berlin blockade, and the invasion of South Korea. As a presiden- 
tial candidate in 1948, he gained only 1 million votes — most of them in 
New York — against more than 24 million for Truman, placing him fourth, 
behind the Dixiecrat candidate, Strom Thurmond. 

Nevertheless, Wallace managed to develop themes which would re- 
main staples of the American radical critique throughout the Cold War, 
and move to center stage during the Vietnam War. These emphasized 
America’s moral inadequacies and those of the friends it was supporting; 
a basic moral equivalence between America and its communist chal- 
lengers; the proposition that America had no obligation to defend any 
area of the world against largely imaginary threats; and the view that 
world opinion was a better guide to foreign policy than geopoliti- 
cal concepts. When aid to Greece and Turkey was first being pro- 
posed, Wallace urged the Truman Administration to put the issue 
before the United Nations. If “the Russians exercised their veto, the 

moral burden would be on them [W]hen we act independently . . . 

the moral burden is on us.” 50 Seizing the moral high ground meant 
more than whether America’s geopolitical interests were being safe- 
guarded. 


469 



Diplomacy 


Though Wallaces radical critique of American postwar foreign policy 
was defeated in the 1940s, its basic tenets reflected a deep strain of 
American idealism that continued to tug at the nation’s soul. The same 
moral convictions which had conferred such energy on America’s interna- 
tional commitments also had the potential to be turned inward by disillu- 
sionment with the outside world, or with America’s own imperfections. 
In the 1920s, isolationism had caused America to withdraw on the ground 
that it was too good for the world; in the Wallace Movement, it revived 
itself in the proposition that America should withdraw because it was not 
good enough for the world. 

Yet when America launched its first permanent peacetime international 
involvement, systematic self-doubt still lay far in the future. The genera- 
tion which had built the New Deal and won the Second World War had 
enormous faith in itself and in the vastness of the American enterprise. 
And the nation’s idealism was well suited to managing a two-power world, 
for which the subtle combinations of the traditional balance-of-power 
diplomacy were not nearly so appropriate. Only a society with enormous 
confidence in its achievements and in its future could have mustered 
the dedication and the resources to strive for a world order in which 
defeated enemies would be conciliated, stricken allies restored, and 
adversaries converted. Great enterprises are often driven by a touch of 
naivete. 

One result of the containment policy was that the United States rele- 
gated itself to an essentially passive diplomacy during the period of its 
greatest power. That is why containment was increasingly challenged by 
yet another constituency, of which John Foster Dulles became the most 
vocal spokesman. They were the conservatives who accepted the prem- 
ises of containment but questioned the absence of urgency with which 
it was being pursued. Even if containment did in the end succeed in 
undermining Soviet society, these critics argued, it would take too long 
and cost too much. Whatever containment might accomplish, a strategy 
of liberation would surely accelerate. By the end of Truman’s presidency, 
the containment policy was caught in a crossfire between those who 
considered it too bellicose (the followers of Wallace) and those who 
thought it too passive (the conservative Republicans). 

This controversy accelerated because, as Lippmann had predicted, in- 
ternational crises increasingly moved to peripheral regions of the globe, 
where the moral issues were confused and direct threats to American 
security were difficult to demonstrate. America found itself drawn into 
wars in areas not protected by alliances and on behalf of ambiguous 
causes and inconclusive outcomes. From Korea to Vietnam, these enter- 


470 



The Success and the Pain of Containment 


prises kept alive the radical critique, which continued to question the 
moral validity of containment. 

Thus surfaced a new variant of American exceptionalism. With all of its 
imperfections, the America of the nineteenth century had thought of itself 
as the beacon of liberty; in the 1960s and 1970s, the torch was said to be 
flickering and would need to be relit before America could return to its 
historic role as an inspiration to the cause of freedom. The debate over 
containment turned into a struggle for the very soul of America. 

As early as 1957, even George Kennan had come to reinterpret contain- 
ment in this light when he wrote: 

To my own countrymen who have often asked me where best to apply 
the hand to counter the Soviet threat, I have accordingly had to reply: 
to our American failings, to the things we are ashamed of in our own 
eyes, or that worry us; to the racial problem, to the conditions in our 
big cities, to the education and environment of our young people, to 
the growing gap between specialized knowledge and popular under- 
standing. 51 

A decade earlier, before he had become disillusioned by what he consid- 
ered the militarization of his invention, George Kennan would have rec- 
ognized that no such choice existed. A country that demands moral 
perfection of itself as a test of its foreign policy will achieve neither 
perfection nor security. It was a measure of Kennan’s achievement that, 
by 1957, all of the free world’s parapets had been manned, his own views 
having made a decisive contribution to this effort. The parapets were in 
fact being manned so effectively that America permitted itself to indulge 
in a hefty dose of self-criticism. 

Containment was an extraordinary theory — at once hardheaded and 
idealistic, profound in its assessment of Soviet motivations yet curiously 
abstract in its prescriptions. Thoroughly American in its utopianism, it 
assumed that the collapse of a totalitarian adversary could be achieved in 
an essentially benign way. Although this doctrine was formulated at the 
height of Americas absolute power, it preached America’s relative weak- 
ness. Postulating a grand diplomatic encounter at the moment of its cul- 
mination, containment allowed no role for diplomacy until the climactic 
final scene in which the men in the white hats accepted the conversion 
of the men in the black hats. 

With all of these qualifications, containment was a doctrine that saw 
America through more than four decades of construction, struggle, and, 
ultimately, triumph. The victim of its ambiguities turned out to be not the 


471 



Diplomacy 


peoples America had set out to defend — on the whole successfully — but 
the American conscience. Tormenting itself in its traditional quest for 
moral perfection, America would emerge, after more than a generation of 
struggle, lacerated by its exertions and controversies, yet having achieved 
almost everything it had set out to do. 


472 




CHAPTER NINETEEN 

The Dilemma of Containment: 
The Korean War 

The United States did not “bring its boys home” from Europe, as Roose- 
velt had envisioned. Instead, it remained deeply involved, setting up insti- 
tutions and programs to guard against Soviet incursions and applying 
pressure on the Soviet sphere wherever possible. 

For three years, the containment policy had worked as it had been 
conceived. The Atlantic Alliance served as a military bulwark against So- 
viet expansion, while the Marshall Plan strengthened Western Europe 
economically and socially. The Greek-Turkish aid program rebuffed the 
Soviet threat in the Eastern Mediterranean, and the Berlin airlift showed 
that the democracies were prepared to risk war to resist threats to their 


473 


Diplomacy 


established rights. In each case, the Soviet Union recoiled rather than face 
a showdown with the United States. 

But the containment theory had a major flaw, causing American leaders 
to act on the basis of two erroneous premises: that their challenges would 
continue to be of as unambiguous a variety as they had been during 
the Second World War; and, second, that the communists would wait 
passively for the disintegration of their own rule, as postulated by the 
containment theory. They failed to consider the possibility that the com- 
munists might seek to break out at some point, choosing as their target 
an area of maximum political or strategic complexity for the United States. 

Containment had been sold to a reluctant Congress on behalf of Eu- 
rope. The fear of a Soviet incursion into the Mediterranean had given rise 
to the Greek-Turkish aid program, and the danger of a Soviet attack on 
Western Europe had led to the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization. The possibility of a Soviet thrust elsewhere had the charac- 
ter of an afterthought, if that. 

Then, on June 25, 1950, America was suddenly forced to come to grips 
with the ambiguities of containment, when it was faced with military 
aggression by a communist surrogate against a country which Washington 
had declared to be outside America’s defense perimeter and from which 
all American forces had been withdrawn the previous year. The aggressor 
was North Korea and the victim was South Korea — both located about as 
far from Europe, the focal point of American strategy, as it was possible 
to be. Yet, just days after the North Korean attack, Truman hastily assem- 
bled an expeditionary force from among the poorly trained occupation 
troops in Japan to implement a strategy of local defense which had never 
been envisaged in American planning or been proposed in Congressional 
testimony. America’s postwar political and strategic doctrine had simply 
ignored the possibility of this kind of aggression. 

American leaders had defined only two likely causes of war: a surprise 
Soviet attack on the United States or an invasion of Western Europe by 
the Red Army. “Plans for the national security,” testified General Omar N. 
Bradley as Army Chief of Staff in 1948, 


must consider the possibility that the United States will be subject to air 
and air-borne attack at the outset. The likelihood and the practicability 

of this kind of attack increases daily We would [therefore] have to 

immediately secure bases from which an enemy might attack us by air. 
Next, we will have to launch an immediate counterattack . . . predomi- 
nantly through the air — To make our counterblows we will need 
bases which we do not have now. The seizing and holding of [these] 
bases . . . will require Army combat elements. 1 


474 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


Bradley failed to explain how or why the Soviet Union might pursue such 
a strategy three years after a devastating war, while the United States 
possessed the atomic monopoly, and the Soviet Union had no known 
capability for long-range air power. 

Nothing in America’s behavior would have led policymakers in Moscow 
or Pyongyang, North Korea’s capital, to expect more than a diplomatic 
protest when North Korean troops crossed the 38th Parallel. They must 
have been as surprised as Saddam Hussein was when America shifted 
from the conciliation of the late 1980s to the massive deployment in the 
Persian Gulf in 1990. The communists in Moscow and Pyongyang had 
taken at face value the pronouncements of leading Americans that had 
placed Korea outside the American defense perimeter. They assumed that 
America would not resist a communist takeover of half of Korea after 
having acquiesced to a communist victory in China, which represented 
an incomparably more important prize. They had obviously failed to 
understand that repeated American declarations proclaiming resistance 
to communist aggression as a moral duty carried far more weight with 
American policymakers than strategic analysis. 

Thus, the Korean War grew out of a double misunderstanding: the 
communists, analyzing the region in terms of American interests, did not 
find it plausible that America would resist at the tip of a peninsula when 
it had conceded most of the mainland of Asia to the communists; while 
America, perceiving the challenge in terms of principle, was less con- 
cerned with Korea’s geopolitical significance — which American leaders 
had publicly discounted — than with the symbolism of permitting commu- 
nist aggression to go unopposed. 

Truman’s courageous decision to take a stand on Korea was in flat 
contradiction to what American leaders had proclaimed only a year be- 
fore. In March 1949, General Douglas MacArthur, Commander of Amer- 
ica’s Pacific forces, had placed Korea squarely outside the American 
defense perimeter in a newspaper interview: 

. . . our line of defense runs through the chain of islands fringing the 
coast of Asia. 

It starts from the Philippines and continues through the Ryukyu Ar- 
chipelago, which includes its main bastion, Okinawa. Then it bends 
back through Japan and the Aleutian Island chain to Alaska. 2 

In a speech before the National Press Club on January 12, 1950, Secretary 
of State Dean Acheson had gone even further. He not only consigned 
Korea to being outside the American defense perimeter, but specifically 
abjured any intentions of guaranteeing areas located on the mainland of 
Asia: 


475 



Diplomacy 


So far as the military security of other areas in the Pacific is concerned, 
it must be clear that no person can guarantee these areas against mili- 
tary attack. But it must also be clear that such a guarantee is hardly 
sensible or necessary within the realm of practical relationship . 3 

In 1949, President Truman, acting on the advice of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, had withdrawn all American military forces from Korea. The South 
Korean army was trained and equipped for little more than police func- 
tions, because Washington feared that South Korea would be tempted to 
unify the country by force if it were given the slightest capacity to do so. 

Khrushchev’s memoirs claim that the invasion of Korea was the brain- 
child of Kim 11 Sung, the North Korean dictator. Stalin, initially wary, had 
allegedly gone along with the plan because he permitted himself to be 
convinced that the enterprise would succeed easily. 4 Both Moscow and 
Pyongyang had failed to understand the role of values in America’s ap- 
proach to international relations. When MacArthur and Acheson spoke 
about American strategy, they were thinking of general war with the 
Soviet Union, the only kind of war America’s leaders had ever systemati- 
cally contemplated. In such a war, Korea would indeed have been outside 
America’s defense perimeter, and the decisive battles would have been 
fought elsewhere. 

America’s leaders had simply never thought about how they would 
react to an aggression confined to Korea, or to any comparable area. 
When they were obliged to confront such a situation so soon after the 
Berlin blockade, the Czech coup, and the communist victory in China, 
they interpreted it as proof that communism was on the march and had 
to be stopped on principle even more than on the basis of strategy. 

Truman’s decision to resist in Korea had a solid foundation in tradi- 
tional concepts of national interest as well. Expansionist communism had 
been escalating its challenge with each postwar year. It had gained a 
foothold in Eastern Europe in 1945 as a byproduct of occupation by the 
Red Army. It had prevailed in Czechoslovakia by means of a domestic 
coup in 1948. It had taken over China in a civil war in 1949. If commmu- 
nist armies could now march across internationally recognized boundary 
lines, the world would have returned to the conditions of the prewar 
period. The generation which had lived through Munich was bound to 
react. A successful invasion of Korea would have had a disastrous impact 
on Japan, right across the narrow Sea of Japan. Japan had always consid- 
ered Korea as the strategic key to Northeast Asia. Unopposed communist 
control would have introduced the specter of a looming Asian communist 
monolith and undermined Japan’s pro-Western orientation. 


476 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


Few foreign policy decisions are more difficult than to improvise mili- 
tary actions which have never been foreseen. Yet Truman rose to the 
occasion. On June 27, two days after North Korean troops crossed the 
38th Parallel, he ordered American air and naval units into action. Byjune 
30, he had committed ground troops from occupation duties in Japan. 

Soviet rigidity eased Truman’s task of leading his country into war. The 
Soviet Ambassador to the United Nations had been boycotting the Secu- 
rity Council and other United Nations institutions for months in protest 
against the world organization’s refusal to turn China’s seat over to 
Beijing. Had the Soviet Ambassador been less terrified of Stalin or been 
able to obtain instructions more rapidly, he would surely have vetoed the 
Security Council resolution proposed by the United States asking North 
Korea to cease hostilities and to return to the 38th Parallel. By failing to 
attend the session and to cast the veto, the Soviet Ambassador gave Tru- 
man the opportunity to organize resistance as a decision of the world 
community and to justify the American role in Korea in the familiar 
Wilsonian terms of freedom versus dictatorship, good versus evil. 
America, said Truman, was going to war to uphold the orders of the 
Security Council. 5 It was not, therefore, intervening in a faraway local 
conflict but opposing an assault against the entire free world: 

The attack upon Korea makes it plain beyond all doubt that Commu- 
nism has passed beyond the use of subversion to conquer independent 
nations and will now use armed invasion and war. It has defied the 
orders of the Security Council of the United Nations issued to preserve 
international peace and security. 6 

Though Truman had powerful geopolitical arguments in favor of inter- 
vention in Korea, he appealed to the American people on the basis of 
their core values, and described intervention as a defense of universal 
principle rather than of the American national interest: “A return to the 
rule of force in international affairs would have far-reaching effects. The 
United States will continue to uphold the rule of law.” 7 That America 
defends principle, not interests, law, and not power, has been a nearly 
sacrosanct tenet of America’s rationale in committing its military forces, 
from the time of the two world wars through the escalation of its involve- 
ment in Vietnam in 1965 and the Gulf War in 1991. 

Once the issue had been raised as being beyond power politics, it 
became extraordinarily difficult to define practical war aims. In a general 
war, which was what American strategic doctrine had contemplated, the 
quest was for total victory and for the unconditional surrender of the 


477 



Diplomacy 


adversary, as it had been in World War II. But what was the political 
objective of a limited war? The simplest and most easily comprehensible 
war aim would have been a literal application of the Security Council 
resolutions — to push North Korean forces back to their starting point 
along the 38th Parallel. But if there was to be no penalty for aggression, 
how was future aggression to be discouraged? If potential aggressors 
came to understand that they would never do worse than the status quo 
ante, containment might turn into an endless progression of limited wars 
that would deplete America’s strength — much as Lippmann had pre- 
dicted. 

On the other hand, what son of penalty was compatible with commit- 
ment to a limited war? Inherent in the strategy of limited wars involving 
the superpowers — directly or indirectly — is the physical ability of either 
side to raise the stakes: this is what defines them as superpowers. A 
balance must therefore be struck. Whichever side convinces the other 
that it is willing to run the greater risk will have the advantage. In Europe, 
Stalin, contrary to any rational analysis of the relationship of forces, had 
managed to bluff the democracies into believing that his readiness to go 
to the brink (and beyond) exceeded theirs. In Asia, the communist side 
was reinforced by the looming menace of China, which had just been 
taken over by the communists and had the potential of raising the stakes 
without the direct involvement of the Soviet Union. The democracies 
were therefore more afraid of escalation than their adversaries — or at 
least so the democracies believed. 

Another factor inhibiting American policy was the commitment to a 
multilateral approach via the United Nations. At the start of the Korean 
War, the United States enjoyed wide support from NATO countries like 
Great Britain and Turkey, which sent sizable troop contingents. Though 
indifferent to the fate of Korea, these countries supported the principle 
of collective action that they might later invoke in their own defense. 
Once this purpose was fulfilled, the majority of the General Assembly of 
the United Nations was far less eager to run the additional risks inherent 
in inflicting further penalties. America thus found itself in a limited war 
for which it had no doctrine and in defense of a distant country in which 
it had declared it had no strategic interest. Beset by ambivalence, America 
perceived no national strategic interest in the Korean peninsula; its princi- 
pal aim was to demonstrate that there was a penalty for aggression. To 
make North Korea pay a price without triggering a wider war, America 
needed to convince those countries with a capacity to escalate, especially 
the Soviet Union and China, that American objectives were indeed lim- 
ited. 


478 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


Unfortunately, the containment theory, in the name of which America 
had engaged itself, produced precisely the opposite temptation: it in- 
duced Truman and his colleagues to expand the political battlefield. With- 
out exception, the key members of the Truman Administration believed 
in a global communist design and treated Korean aggression as the first 
move in a coordinated Sino-Soviet strategy which might well be the pre- 
lude to a general assault. As American troops were deployed into Korea, 
they therefore looked for ways to convey America’s determination to 
resist communist aggression throughout the Pacific area. They coupled 
the announcement of the dispatch of troops with an order to the Seventh 
Fleet to protect Taiwan against Communist China: “The occupation of 
Formosa by Communist forces would be a direct threat to the security of 
the Pacific area and to United States forces performing their lawful and 
necessary functions in that area .” 8 Furthermore, Truman increased mili- 
tary aid to French forces opposing the communist-led independence 
struggle in Vietnam. (Governmental decisions usually have more than 
one motive; these actions had the added advantage from Truman’s point 
of view of co-opting the so-called China Lobby in the United States Senate, 
which had been highly critical of his Administration’s “abandonment” of 
mainland China.) 

To Mao Tse-tung, fresh from his triumph in the Chinese civil war, 
Truman’s announcements were bound to appear as the mirror image of 
America’s fear of a communist conspiracy: he construed them as the 
opening move in an American attempt to reverse the communists’ victory 
in the Chinese civil war. In protecting Taiwan, Truman was supporting 
what America still recognized as the legitimate Chinese government. The 
stepped-up aid program to Vietnam appeared to Beijing as capitalist encir- 
clement. It all added up to giving Beijing the incentive to do the opposite 
of what America should have considered desirable: Mao had reason to 
conclude that, if he did not stop America in Korea, he might have to fight 
America on Chinese territory; at a minimum, he was given no reason 
to think otherwise. “The American imperialists fondly hope,” wrote the 
People’s Daily, “that their armed aggression against Taiwan will keep us 
from liberating it. Around China in particular their designs for blockades 
are taking shape in the pattern of a stretched-out snake. Starting from 
South Korea, it stretches to Japan, the Ryukyu Islands, Taiwan and the 
Philippines and then turns up at Vietnam .” 9 

The American military strategy compounded China’s misperception of 
America’s intentions. As noted earlier, American leaders have traditionally 
viewed diplomacy and strategy as being separate activities. In the conven- 
tional view of the American military, they first achieve an outcome and 


479 



Diplomacy 


then the diplomats take over; neither ever tells the other how to pursue 
its objectives. In a limited war, if military and political goals are not 
synchronized from the very beginning, there is always a danger of doing 
either too much or too little. Doing too much and allowing the military 
element to predominate erodes the dividing line to all-out war and 
tempts the adversary to raise the stakes. Doing too little and allowing the 
diplomatic side to dominate risks submerging the purpose of the war in 
negotiating tactics and a proclivity to settle for a stalemate. 

In Korea, America fell into both of these traps. In the early stages of the 
war, the American expeditionary force was confined to a perimeter 
around the port city of Pusan at the southernmost tip of the Korean 
peninsula. Survival was the principal goal; the relationship between war 
and diplomacy was far from the minds of America’s leaders. Douglas 
MacArthur, America’s most talented general of this century, served as the 
Commander. Unlike most of his colleagues, MacArthur was not a devotee 
of the preferred American strategy of attrition. During the Second World 
War, despite the priority given to the European theater, MacArthur had 
developed the strategy of “island hopping,” which bypassed the Japanese 
strong points and concentrated on weakly defended islands, bringing 
American forces from Australia to the Philippines in the space of two 
years. 

MacArthur now applied the same strategy to Korea. Against the advice 
of his more orthodox superiors in Washington, he landed American 
forces at Inchon (the port of Seoul), well over 200 miles behind enemy 
lines, cutting North Korean supply lines with Pyongyang. The North Ko- 
rean army collapsed and the road north lay open. 

Victory led to perhaps the most fateful decision of the Korean War. If 
America was ever going to relate its military objectives to its political 
goals, this was the time. Truman had three choices. He could order a halt 
on the 38th Parallel and restore the status quo ante. He could authorize 
an advance farther north to exact a penalty for aggression. He could 
authorize MacArthur to unify Korea up to the Chinese border; in other 
words, to let the outcome of the war be dictated entirely by military 
considerations. The best decision would have been to advance to the 
narrow neck of the Korean peninsula, a hundred miles short of the Chi- 
nese frontier. This would have been a defensible line which would have 
included 90 percent of the population of the peninsula as well as the 
capital of North Korea, Pyongyang. And it would have achieved a major 
political success without challenging China. 

Although MacArthur was a brilliant strategist, he was less perceptive as 
a political analyst. Ignoring China’s historic memory of the Japanese inva- 


480 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


sion of Manchuria, which had taken the same route through Korea, Mac- 
Arthur pressed for an advance to the Chinese frontier at the Yalu River. 
Blinded by his commander’s unexpected success at Inchon, Truman ac- 
quiesced. In abandoning any middle ground between the status quo 
ante and total victory, Truman gave up the geographic and demographic 
advantages of the narrow neck of the Korean peninsula. He traded a 100- 
mile-long defensive line located a considerable distance from the Chinese 
border for the necessity of protecting a 400-mile front right next to the 
main concentrations of Chinese communist power. 

It could not have been an easy decision for China to challenge the 
world’s greatest military power after the suffering, the devastation, and 
the casualties wrought by a Japanese invasion and a bitter civil war. Until 
Chinese archives are opened, it will not be known whether Mao would 
have intervened once American forces crossed the 38th Parallel, regard- 
less of how limited their advance or how far north he would have allowed 
them to advance. But the art of policy is to create a calculation of the risks 
and rewards that affect the adversary’s calculations. One way of influenc- 
ing the Chinese decision to intervene would have been to stop the Ameri- 
can advance at the narrow neck of the Korean peninsula, and to offer to 
demilitarize the rest of the country under some form of international 
control. 

Washington was feeling its way in that direction when it ordered MacAr- 
thur not to approach the Yalu River with non-Korean forces. But the order 
was never translated into a political proposal to Beijing, nor was it ever 
made public. In any event, MacArthur disregarded the directive as being 
“impractical.” And Washington, true to its tradition of not second-guess- 
ing a field commander, did not insist. MacArthur had been so unexpect- 
edly successful at Inchon that America’s political leaders were more than 
half convinced that he understood Asia better than they did. 

When the Chinese People’s Army struck, the shock of surprise induced 
a nearly panicky retreat of American forces from the Yalu to south of 
Seoul, which was abandoned for the second time in six months. Without 
a doctrine for limited war, the crisis caused the Truman Administration 
to lose control over the political aims. Depending on the fluctuations of 
combat, the political objectives were stated as stopping aggression, unify- 
ing Korea, maintaining the security of United Nations forces, guaranteeing 
a cease-fire along the 38th Parallel, and keeping the war from spreading. 

When American ground troops entered combat in early July 1950, the 
objective was stated as “repelling aggression,” though that term was never 
given a concrete meaning. After the landing at Inchon in September 
and the collapse of the North Korean army, the objective changed to 


481 



Diplomacy 


“unification.” Truman proclaimed it on October 17, 1950, but without 
putting forward a political framework for dealing with China. Truman’s 
communications intended for Beijing never went beyond repeating sacra- 
mental protestations of good faith, which, to Mao, were precisely what 
was at issue: “Our sole purpose in Korea,” said Truman in ordering the 
advance north, 

is to establish peace and independence. Our troops will stay there only 
so long as they are needed by the United Nations for that purpose. We 
seek no territory or special privilege in Korea or anywhere else. We 
have no aggressive designs in Korea or in any other place in the Far 
East or elsewhere. 10 

Mao was incapable of relying on such assurances from his principal capi- 
talist adversary, who was at that moment protecting his mortal enemies 
in Taiwan. Nor did Truman concretely define the “aggressive designs” he 
was renouncing, or set a time limit on the removal of American troops 
from North Korea. The only way the United States could have kept Mao 
from intervening, if indeed that was possible, was by proposing the cre- 
ation of some kind of buffer zone along the Chinese border. That was 
never attempted. 

Over the next months, American forces would prove just how great a 
risk the Chinese leaders had run. Their early victories along the Yalu had 
been due to surprise and to the dispersal of American forces. It soon 
became apparent that the Chinese army did not have the firepower to 
overrun entrenched American positions and that, deprived of the element 
of surprise, it could not breach a well-established line — for example, 
along the narrow neck of the peninsula. Once American forces were 
reorganized, they proved that, at that stage of China’s development, its 
forces were no match for American firepower. 

No sooner had China entered the war than American objectives 
changed again, and literally within days. On November 26, 1950, the 
Chinese launched their counterattack; by November 30, Truman had is- 
sued a statement abandoning unification as a war aim and leaving it to 
“later negotiations.” The vague concept of “halting aggression” again 
became America’s principal goal: 

The forces of the United Nations are in Korea to put down an aggres- 
sion that threatens not only the whole fabric of the United Nations, but 
all human hopes of peace and justice. If the United Nations yields to 
the forces of aggression, no nation will be safe or secure. 11 


482 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


By early January 1951, the front line was some fifty miles south of the 
38th Parallel and Seoul was once again in communist hands. At that point, 
the Chinese repeated MacArthur’s mistake of three months earlier. Had 
they offered to settle along the 38th Parallel, Washington would surely 
have accepted, and China would have gained the credit for defeating the 
United States Army a year after winning its own civil war. But, like Truman 
six months earlier, Mao was carried away by his unexpected successes 
and sought to expel American forces from the peninsula altogether. He 
too suffered a major setback. The Chinese incurred punishing casualties 
when they attacked fixed American positions south of Seoul. 

By April 1951, the battle had turned once more, and American forces 
crossed the 38th Parallel for the second time. But the battle was not the 
only aspect of the war that had turned. For the Truman Administration 
was by now so traumatized by the shock of Chinese intervention that the 
avoidance of risk turned into its principal objective. 

Washington’s assessment of risks was based on a number of misconcep- 
tions, however. America assumed — as it would do a decade later in Viet- 
nam — that it was facing a centrally controlled communist conspiracy to 
take over the world. And if Moscow called the shots, it followed that 
neither China nor Korea would have entered the war without being 
assured of Soviet backing. The Kremlin, Washington now believed, would 
not accept defeat; it would raise the ante after every setback for its clients. 
By aiming for limited victory, America might trigger a general war with 
the Soviet Union. America therefore could not afford to win even a lim- 
ited victory because the communist bloc would pay any price in order 
not to lose. 

The reality was quite different. Stalin had gone along with the North 
Korean attack only after Kim II Sung had assured him that it would involve 
little risk of war. Insofar as Stalin encouraged the Chinese to intervene, it 
was probably to increase China’s dependence on the Soviet Union. The 
real fanatics on the issue were in Beijing and Pyongyang; the Korean War 
was not a Kremlin plot to draw America into Asia so that it could then 
attack Europe. The deterrent to a Soviet attack on Europe was the Strate- 
gic Air Command, which was not used in Korea. The Soviet Union had 
little, if any, nuclear striking power. Given the disparity in nuclear 
strength, Stalin had far more to lose from general war than the United 
States. No matter how great the disparity in ground forces in Europe, it is 
highly improbable that Stalin would have run the risk of war with the 
United States over Korea. As it was, Stalin’s aid to China was grudging, 
and he demanded cash payment for it, sowing the seeds of the Sino- 
Soviet rift. 


483 



Diplomacy 


America’s leaders believed that they had learned the dangers of escala- 
tion, but they failed to consider the penalties of stalemate. “We are fight- 
ing to resist an outrageous aggression in Korea,” said Truman in April 
1951. 

We are trying to keep the Korean conflict from spreading to other 
areas. But at the same time, we must conduct our military activities so 
as to ensure the security of our forces. This is essential if they are to 
continue the fight until the enemy abandons its ruthless attempt to 
destroy the Republic of Korea . 12 

But fighting a war on behalf of the “security of our forces” is strategically 
vacuous. Since the war itself is what is risking their security, making 
“security of our forces” the objective must turn into a tautology. Since 
Truman offered no war aim other than inducing the enemy to abandon 
its efforts — in other words, at best a return to the status quo ante — the 
resulting frustrations generated pressures for victory. MacArthur did not 
consider stalemate a meaningful objective. He argued strenuously and 
eloquently that the danger of escalation had been inherent in the initial 
decision to intervene, and that it could not be mitigated by restraint in 
the conduct of military operations. If anything, they would increase these 
risks by prolonging the war. In testifying in 1951, MacArthur insisted: 
“You have got a war on your hands, and you can’t just say, ‘Let that war 

go on indefinitely while I prepare for some other war ’ ” 13 Because he 

would not accept the Administration’s view that the Korean War had to 
be conducted in a manner that avoided giving the Soviets a pretext for 
launching a full-scale attack, MacArthur advocated a strategy to defeat the 
Chinese armies, at least in Korea. 

MacArthur ’s proposals included “an ultimatum that she [China] would 
either come and talk terms of a cease-fire within a reasonable period of 
time or her actions in Korea would be regarded as a declaration of war 
against the nations engaged there and that those nations would take such 
steps as they felt necessary to bring the thing to a conclusion .” 14 At various 
times, MacArthur urged bombing Manchurian bases, blockading China, 
reinforcing American troops in Korea, and introducing Chinese National- 
ist forces from Taiwan into Korea — based on what MacArthur considered 
“the normal way” to “bring about just and honorable peace at the soonest 
time possible with the least loss of life by utilizing all of your potential .” 15 

Several of MacArthur’s recommendations went far beyond the province 
of a theater commander. For example, introducing Chinese Nationalist 
forces into Korea would have amounted to a declaration of all-out war 


484 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


against the People’s Republic of China. Once the Chinese civil war was 
transferred to Korean soil, neither Chinese side could end it before 
achieving total victory; and America would have enmeshed itself in an 
open-ended conflict. 

Yet the fundamental issue was not so much the adequacy of MacAr- 
thur’s specific recommendations as that he had posed the key question: 
was there any choice between stalemate and all-out war? By April 11, 
1951, when Truman dismissed MacArthur, the debate broke out into the 
open. Characteristically courageous, Truman had no alternative except to 
dismiss a publicly insubordinate commander. But he also committed 
America to a strategy which left the initiative in the hands of the adversary. 
For in making the announcement, Truman modified American objectives 
once more. For the first time, “repelling aggression” was defined as 
reaching a settlement along the existing cease-fire line, wherever that 
might be — thereby creating another incentive for the Chinese to increase 
their military effort in order to obtain the best possible line: 

Real peace can be achieved through a settlement based on the follow- 
ing factors: 

One: The fighting must stop. 

Two: Concrete steps must be taken to insure that the fighting will not 
break out again. 

Three: There must be an end to the aggression. 16 

Unification of Korea, which the United States had sought six months 
earlier by force of arms, was relegated to the future: “A settlement 
founded upon these elements would open the way for the unification of 
Korea and the withdrawal of all foreign forces.” 17 

MacArthur returned to a hero’s welcome and a series of widely publi- 
cized Senate hearings. MacArthur based his case on what he described as 
the traditional relationship between foreign policy and military strategy: 


The general definition which for many decades has been accepted was 
that war was the ultimate process of politics; that when all other politi- 
cal means failed, you then go to force; and when you do that, the 
balance of control, the balance of concept, the main interest involved, 
the minute you reach the killing stage, is the control of the military. . . . 
I do unquestionably state that when men become locked in battle, that 
there should be no artifice under the name of politics, which should 
handicap your own men, decrease their chances for winning, and in- 
crease their losses. 18 


485 



Diplomacy 


MacArthur had a point when he railed against stalemate as national policy. 
He had made political restrictions inevitable, however, by arguing against 
putting forward any political goals whatsoever, even those needed to 
support a local victory. If diplomacy were to be prevented from defining 
war aims, every conflict would automatically become an all-out war, re- 
gardless of the stakes and the risks, not a negligible consideration in the 
age of nuclear weapons. 

The Truman Administration, however, went further. It not only rejected 
MacArthur s recommendations but argued that no alternative to its strat- 
egy of stalemate could possibly work. General Bradley, now chairman of 
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, defined three military options: 

Either to get out and forsake South Korea, try to fight it out in general 
where we are now without committing too great forces, or going to all- 
out war and committing sufficient forces to drive these people out of 
Korea. At the present time we are following the second course . 19 

In the American government, option papers nearly always urge the mid- 
dle among three options. Because the foreign policy establishment tends 
to position its recommendations between the course of doing nothing 
and the course of general war, experienced bureaucrats know that the 
morale of their subordinates is enhanced if they pick the middle road. 
This was surely the case with Bradley s options, though the phrase “fight 
it out in general . . . without committing too great forces” simply restated 
the dilemma of a policy without clear-cut objectives. 

Dean Acheson confirmed in the language of diplomacy that Americas 
goal in Korea was indeed stalemate. American objectives in Korea were 
to “end the aggression, to safeguard against its renewal, and to restore 
peace .” 20 Without defining any of these terms, Acheson went on to depre- 
cate the effectiveness of the measures proposed by MacArthur: “Against 
the dubious advantages of spreading the war in an initially limited man- 
ner to the mainland of China,” said the Secretary of State, “there must be 
measured the risk of a general war with China, the risk of Soviet interven- 
tion, and of world war III, as well as the probable effects upon the 
solidarity of the free world coalition”; it was “difficult to see how the 
Soviet Union could ignore a direct attack upon the Chinese mainland .” 21 

If the United States dared not win but could not afford to lose, what 
were its options? W'hen all the general phrases were reduced to specifics, 
it was stalemate on the battlefront and, therefore, at the negotiating table 
as well. In his memoirs, Truman summed up the views of all his subordi- 
nates, military and civilian alike: 


486 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


Every decision I made in connection with the Korean conflict had this 
one aim in mind: to prevent a third world war and the terrible destruc- 
tion it would bring to the civilized world. This meant that we should 
not do anything that would provide the excuse to the Soviets and 
plunge the free nations into full-scale all-out war . 22 

The belief that the Soviet Union stood poised for general war revealed an 
extraordinary loss of touch with the real power relationships. Stalin was 
not looking for a pretext to start a general war; he was most eager to 
avoid it. Had he sought a confrontation, there were more than enough 
pretexts available in Europe or in the military actions already taking place 
in Korea. Not surprisingly, at no stage of the war did the Soviet Union 
threaten to intervene or to take any military action. Nothing in Stalins 
cautious and suspicious character suggested a reckless adventurer; he 
always preferred stealth and indirection to actual confrontation, and had 
been especially careful not to run a risk of war with the United States — 
with good reason. Given the disparity in the nuclear capabilities of the 
two sides, it was the Soviet Union which had everything to lose in a 
general war. 

Amazingly, all administration witnesses stressed the opposite point of 
view. Marshall claimed that it would take the United States another two 
to three years to prepare for a general war . 23 Bradley argued that “we are 
not in the best position to meet a global war .” 24 Hence his famous quote 
that general war over Korea would “involve us in the wrong war, at the 
wrong place, at the wrong time, and with the wrong enemy .” 25 Acheson 
too considered that more time was needed “to build an effective deter- 
rent force .” 26 

Why, in light of the emerging Soviet nuclear capability, America’s lead- 
ers should have thought that the significance of their deterrent force 
would increase with the passage of time can only be explained as yet 
another manifestation of the strange premises of the containment theory 
— that America was weak when it in fact possessed an atomic monopoly, 
and that its position of strength could be improved while the Soviet 
Union was building up its own nuclear arsenal. Stalin was successful in 
deterring the United States from attempting a limited victory in Korea by 
capitalizing on this self-induced hypnosis and without having to do any- 
thing specifically threatening. 

After the Chinese intervened, America never seriously explored the 
option of limited victory. The Truman Administration’s basic postulate, 
that to try for more than stalemate was either impossible or risked all-out 
war, did not, in fact, exhaust the range of available options. An intermedi- 


487 



Diplomacy 


ate course such as the one I discussed earlier — a dividing line along the 
narrow neck of the peninsula, with the rest of the country demilitarized 
under international supervision — could have been pursued, or imposed 
unilaterally if it were rejected. China probably would not have had the 
means to prevent this — as General Matthew Ridgway, MacArthur’s succes- 
sor, also thought — without, however, recommending it. 27 

MacArthur was almost certainly right when he argued that “China is 
using the maximum of her force against us.” 28 As for the Soviet Union, it 
would have had to decide whether, in light of the vast American nuclear 
superiority and Soviet economic weakness, an American advance over 
the relatively short distance between the 38th Parallel and the narrow 
neck of the peninsula justified the risk of general war. Of course, China 
might neither have acquiesced nor fought, but maintained a threatening 
stance wherever the line was established. But that situation would not 
have been very different from what finally emerged along the 38th Paral- 
lel. China would almost certainly have ceased to make any threats once 
its policy became dominated by the fear of Soviet aggression and had 
begun to move in the direction of the United States. Had the first commu- 
nist military challenge against the United States suffered a demonstrable 
setback, greater caution might subsequently have been exercised by other 
militants in such areas as Indochina. And the Sino-Soviet split would 
almost certainly have been accelerated 

In the spring of 1951, a new American offensive under General Ridgway 
was grinding its way north, using traditional American tactics of attrition. 
It had liberated Seoul and crossed the 38th Parallel when, in June 1951, 
the communists proposed armistice negotiations. At that point, Washing- 
ton ordered an end to offensive action; henceforth, all operations at 
battalion level and above had to be approved by the Supreme Com- 
mander — a gesture the Truman Administration believed would improve 
the atmosphere for negotiations by demonstrating to the Chinese that 
Washington was not aiming for victory. 

It was a classically American gesture. Because of their conviction that 
peace is normal and goodwill natural, American leaders have generally 
sought to encourage negotiations by removing elements of coercion and 
by unilateral demonstrations of goodwill. In fact, in most negotiations, 
unilateral gestures remove a key negotiating asset. In general, diplomats 
rarely pay for services already rendered — especially in wartime. Typi- 
cally, it is pressure on the battlefield that generates the negotiation. Re- 
lieving that pressure reduces the enemy’s incentive to negotiate seriously, 
and it tempts him to drag out the negotiations in order to determine 
whether other unilateral gestures might be forthcoming. 


488 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


This was exactly what happened in Korea. American restraint enabled 
China to end the process by which its army was being ground down by 
American technical and material superiority. Henceforth, and without 
significant risk, the Chinese could use military operations to inflict casual- 
ties and to magnify America’s frustrations and domestic pressures to end 
the war. During the pause, the communists dug themselves into nearly 
impregnable positions across forbidding and mountainous terrain, gradu- 
ally eliminating the American threat to resume hostilities . 29 This led to a 
drawn-out war of attrition, which was brought to a halt only because a 
painful equilibrium emerged between Chinas physical limitations and 
America’s psychological inhibitions. Yet the price of stalemate was that 
the number of American casualties during the negotiations exceeded 
those of the preceding period of full-scale war. 

The stalemate America sought descended on both the military and 
diplomatic fronts. The impact of military stalemate on the troops was well 
described by a British official observer, Brigadier A. K. Ferguson: 


It seems to me that the reputed objective of UN forces in Korea which 
is “to repel aggression and restore peace and security to the area” is 
much too vague under present circumstances to give the Supreme 
Commander in the field a military objective, the attainment of which 
would bring hostilities to a close Already many British and Ameri- 

can officers and other ranks have asked such questions as “When will 
the war in Korea end?” “When do you think the UN forces can be 
withdrawn from Korea?” “What is our object in Korea?” Such questions 
tend to make me believe that, unless the British and American forces in 
Korea are given some definite goal at which to aim, the commander in 
the field will have the greatest difficulty in maintaining morale. . . . 30 


In opting for stalemate, America incurred the first big postwar wrench in 
its foreign policy consensus. To MacArthur and his supporters, the Korean 
War was a frustration because its limits guaranteed military and political 
stalemate. To the Truman Administration, the Korean War was a night- 
mare because it was too big a war for its political objectives, and too small 
a war for its strategic doctrine. MacArthur sought a showdown over Korea 
even if it involved going to war against China, whereas the Administration 
sought to husband America’s strength to resist the Soviet thrust against 
Europe postulated by the containment theory. 

The Korean War thus revealed both the strengths and the limits of 
containment. In terms of traditional statecraft, Korea was the test case for 
determining the demarcation lines between the two competing spheres 


489 



Diplomacy 


of influence, then in the process of being formed. But Americans per- 
ceived it quite differently, as a conflict between good and evil, and as a 
struggle on behalf of the free world. That interpretation endowed Ameri- 
can actions with an enormous drive and dedication. It also caused con- 
tainment to oscillate from the technical to the apocalyptic. Great acts of 
construction, such as the recovery of Europe and Japan, existed alongside 
a serious lack of appreciation for nuance and an extraordinary overesti- 
mation of Soviet capabilities. Issues capable of being encapsuled in moral 
or legal formulae were well and thoughtfully handled; but there was also 
a tendency to concentrate on the formula rather than on the purpose it 
was supposed to serve. In measuring America’s success in Korea, Acheson 
was less concerned with the outcome on the battlefield than with estab- 
lishing the concept of collective security: “The idea of collective security 
has been put to the test, and has been sustained. The nations who believe 
in collective security have shown that they can stick together and fight 
together .” 31 Establishing the principle of collective action was more im- 
portant than any specific outcome as long as defeat was avoided. 

These aspects of the containment policy imposed a perhaps exorbitant 
burden on the American people, who were being asked to endure heavy 
casualties while their political leaders sought to navigate the narrowest of 
passages between resisting aggression and avoiding general war — with- 
out ever giving either term an operational meaning. The consequence of 
this approach was an outburst of frustration and a search for scapegoats. 
Marshall, and especially Acheson, were vilified. Alleged communist infil- 
tration in Washington was systematically exploited by such demagogues 
as Senator Joseph McCarthy. 

Nevertheless, the most significant aspect of the American public’s reac- 
tion to the Korean War was not its restlessness with an inconclusive war 
but its endurance of it. In the face of all the frustrations, America persisted 
in bearing the burden of global responsibility in a seemingly endless 
struggle which imposed heavy casualties without leading to a definitive 
outcome. In the end, America achieved its goal, if at a higher price and 
over a longer period of time than was necessary. A decade and a half 
later, Americans would again experience an even deeper anguish over 
the conflict in Indochina. 

A fundamental difference existed, however, between the Korean do- 
mestic challenge and the agony America later experienced over Indo- 
china. The critics of the Korean War were urging victory, whereas the 
critics of the Vietnam War were advocating the acceptance and sometimes 
the importance of defeat. The controversy over the Korean War gave the 
Truman Administration a bargaining lever; Truman and his advisers could 


490 



The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 


use the domestic opposition as a threat against North Korea and China, 
since its alternative was a more energetic prosecution of the war. The 
opposite was true of the war in Indochina. The opponents of the war who 
promoted unconditional withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam 
weakened the American bargaining position. 

In the final analysis, all of the belligerents in the Korean War drew 
important lessons from it. The American statesmen of the period deserve 
to be remembered for the vision with which they committed forces to a 
distant country which, only a few months earlier, they had declared to be 
irrelevant to American security. When the challenge came, they had the 
courage to reverse themselves because they understood that acquies- 
cence to the communist occupation of Korea would undermine the Amer- 
ican position in Asia, especially America’s crucial relationship with Japan. 

At the beginning of a generation of world leadership, America passed 
its first test, albeit somewhat laboriously. Yet America’s innocence was 
but the reverse side of an extraordinary capacity for dedication, which 
enabled Americans to endure the death and injury of nearly 150,000 of 
their own in a war without a conclusive outcome. The crisis in Korea led 
to an augmentation of strength in Europe and the creation of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization, which made it possible to sustain the long 
endurance contest that the Cold War was now sure to become. Where 
America paid a price was among the revolutionary leaders of Southeast 
Asia and elsewhere, who discovered a method of warfare that avoided 
large-scale ground combat yet had the ability to wear down the resolve 
of a superpower. 

China’s lessons were more mixed. Despite its substantial material infe- 
riority, China had managed a stalemate with the American superpower 
through a combination of military and diplomatic maneuvers. But it also 
learned the price tag of confronting American military power frontally. 
There were to be no other Sino-American military clashes during the 
Cold War. And the Soviet Union’s grudging and ungenerous support of 
Beijing planted the seeds for the Sino-Soviet rift. 

The biggest loser in Korea turned out to be the Soviet Union, the 
country which American leaders thought had masterminded the whole 
enterprise. Within two years of the invasion of Korea, America had mobi- 
lized its side of the global dividing line. The United States tripled its 
defense expenditures and transformed the Atlantic Alliance from a politi- 
cal coalition into an integrated military organization headed by an Ameri- 
can Supreme Commander. German rearmament was within view, and an 
attempt was being made to create a European army. The vacuum which 
had existed in front of Soviet armies in Central Europe was being filled. 


491 



Diplomacy 


Even if one assumes that America might have achieved more in Korea, 
the Soviets would henceforth be obliged to measure their successes in 
terms of mitigating losses and perhaps encouraging later communist ad- 
venturers, especially in Indochina. In return, they faced a massive tilt in 
the mobilized balance of power because of allied rearmament and the 
strengthening of allied cohesion. 

This shift in what the Marxists call the correlation offerees was not lost 
on the leader who had specialized in basing his policy on such analysis. 
Within eighteen months of the invasion of South Korea, Stalin initiated a 
reassessment of Soviet policies that was to culminate in the most signifi- 
cant Soviet diplomatic overture of the immediate postwar period. 


492 




CHAPTER TWE NTY 

Negotiating with the 
Communists: Adenauer, 
Churchill, and Eisenhower 

In March 1952, before the Korean War had ended, Stalin made a diplo- 
matic overture to settle the Cold War for reasons quite contrary to the 
expectations of the fathers of containment. This initiative was not caused 
by the transformation of the Soviet system, as they had predicted. Instead, 
the arch-ideologue sought to protect the communist system from an arms 
race he must have known that it could not win. Indeed, given his combi- 
nation of Marxism and paranoia, Stalin probably could not believe that 
America would mobilize so much power for primarily defensive pur- 
poses. 


493 


Diplomacy 


Stalin’s offer said nothing about the establishment of a harmonious 
world order. Rather than do away with the conditions which had caused 
the Cold War, Stalin’s proposal called for mutual recognition of that buga- 
boo of American thinking — two spheres of influence: one for America in 
Western Europe, the other for the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe with a 
unified, armed, neutral Germany between them. 

Ever since, historians and political leaders have been debating whether 
Stalin’s move represented a missed opportunity to settle the Cold War, or 
whether it had been a clever ploy to draw the democracies into a negotia- 
tion, the very opening of which would have blocked German rearma- 
ment. Was Stalin trying to tempt the West into actions that would have 
weakened its cohesion, or did he mean to reverse the ever-deepening 
East-West confrontation? 

The answer is that Stalin himself had probably not decided how far he 
was prepared to go in order to ease tensions with the West. Though he 
made offers which the democracies would have eagerly accepted four 
years earlier, his conduct in the interim had made it nearly impossible to 
test his sincerity — indeed, it had rendered his sincerity almost irrelevant. 
For, whatever Stalin’s ultimate intentions, testing them would have se- 
verely strained the cohesion of the Atlantic Alliance and therefore re- 
moved the incentive which had led to the offer in the first place. 

In any event, the arch-calculator had neglected to consider one decisive 
factor: his own mortality. A year after Stalin had made the proposal, he 
lay dead. His successors did not have the tenacity to insist on a compre- 
hensive negotiation, nor did they have the authority to make the sweeping 
concessions which would have been required to sustain it. In the end, 
the peace overture lingered as a tantalizing episode illustrating, above all, 
the vastly different premises that motivated the two sides in the Cold War. 

Dedicated to the proposition that legal commitments create their own 
reality, America waited for Stalin to implement the Yalta and Potsdam 
agreements. Considering an agreement obligatory only if it reflected a 
balance of forces, Stalin waited for the democracies to insist on their 
rights in some manner that would enable him to analyze the risks and 
rewards of carrying out the agreement. Pending that, Stalin would bide 
his time, collecting as many bargaining chips as possible in preparation 
for some concrete move — or what Stalin considered a concrete move — 
by the democracies. 

That moment seemed to have arrived in the early 1950s. The United 
States had launched the Marshall Plan in 1947 and the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization in 1949. The Federal Republic of Germany had come 
into being under Western auspices. Stalin’s initial reaction was character- 


494 



Negotiating with the Communists 


istically truculent; hence the Berlin blockade, the Czech coup, and his 
approval of the invasion of South Korea. Nevertheless, the United States 
succeeded in creating, step by step, a sphere of influence containing all 
the advanced industrial countries of the world. 

For his part, Stalin had managed to construct a security belt in Eastern 
Europe, an achievement which nevertheless amounted to an extension of 
weakness. A calculator of power, he had to understand, and probably 
better than the leaders of the democracies could have, that what he had 
gained was no real accretion of strength, and that, on balance, the satellite 
orbit would prove to be a drain on Soviet resources. By contrast, the 
NATO countries and Japan represented a vast potential industrial reser- 
voir. The long-term trends, so beloved of Marxist analysts, favored the 
American sphere of influence. In terms of Realpolitik, Stalin’s empire was 
in deep trouble. 

The American-led grouping had cut its teeth militarily, so to speak, 
during the Korean War and had developed an extensive military potential. 
Stalin seems to have realized that his challenges to the cohesion of the 
democracies had backfired. His truculence and heavy-handed policies in 
Eastern Europe had fostered unity in the Western coalition and brought 
a rearmed Germany into view. 

The harmonious world postulated by American wartime thinking had 
been transformed into two armed camps, each driven by fears that turned 
out to be unfounded. American leaders perceived in the Korean War a 
Soviet strategy for luring America into distant Asian conflicts to facilitate a 
Soviet assault on the allied position in Europe, a gross overestimation of 
both Soviet power and Stalins methods. At no stage in his career had that 
meticulous and shrewd analyst staked everything on one throw of the 
dice. At the same time, Stalin construed the Western buildup not as the 
defensive move that it actually was but as a pretext for the showdown he 
had always anticipated and had so consistently sought to avoid. Both sides 
were in fact preparing for what neither side intended — a direct, all-out 
challenge. 

Stalin was not willing to test whether his nightmare was real. Whenever 
confronted with the possibility of a military conflict with America, Stalin 
invariably recoiled. He had done so when Truman demanded that Soviet 
troops leave Iranian Azerbaijan in 1946, and he had ended the Berlin 
blockade of 1948-49 before it could turn into a shooting war. Now, he 
energetically set about defusing the confrontation which he had brought 
on, signaling an impending change in course with one of the elliptical 
pronouncements that were his trademark. 

In this instance, Stalin’s approach was particularly obtuse, because he 


495 



Diplomacy 


wanted to avoid giving the slightest hint of weakness to an adversary that 
was in the process of basing its policy on positions of strength. His goal 
was to indicate that he wished to avoid a confrontation without appearing 
to shrink from it. Stalin’s pretext was a view put forward in a highly 
theoretical book published several years earlier by the economist Yev- 
genii Varga. 1 The author had argued that capitalist systems were becoming 
more stable and that war among them was therefore no longer inevitable. 
If Varga was right, the strategy Stalin had pursued since the 1920s — of 
playing the capitalists off against each other — would no longer work. The 
capitalists, far from fighting each other, might go so far as to unite against 
the socialist motherland, a possibility foreshadowed by the creation of 
NATO and the Japanese-American alliance. 

Stalin countered this argument with an elaborate essay of his own 
entitled “Economic Problems of Socialism in the U.S.S.R.,” which was 
published in October 1952 as a guideline for the forthcoming Party Con- 
gress. 2 In his article, Stalin reconsecrated the true communist faith as he 
had promulgated it in 1934, 1939, and 1946, to the effect that, far from 
becoming more stable, capitalism was facing an ever-accelerating crisis: 

It is said that the contradictions between capitalism and socialism are 
stronger than the contradictions among the capitalist countries. Theo- 
retically, of course, that is true. It is not only true now, today; it was true 
before the Second World War. And it was more or less realized by the 
leaders of the capitalist countries. Yet the Second World War began not 
as a war with the U.S.S.R, but as a war between capitalist countries. 3 

Whenever Stalin recycled his familiar litany of the inevitability of war 
among the capitalists, the faithful understood that he meant to reassure 
them. According to Stalin’s convoluted reasoning, the prospect of conflict 
among the capitalists meant that war between them and the Soviet Union 
was not imminent. Stalin’s article was therefore an instruction to Soviet 
diplomacy to delay a showdown until the capitalists’ internal conflicts had 
sufficiently weakened them. 

In 1939, a comparable pronouncement had signaled Stalin’s readiness 
to seek accommodation with Hitler. That analysis, Stalin now argued 
in 1952, remained correct, because, given their propensity for war, the 
capitalists risked less in fighting each other than in making war on the 
Soviet Union: “ . . whereas war between capitalist countries puts in ques- 
tion only the supremacy of certain capitalist countries over others, war 
with the U.S.S.R. must certainly put in question the existence of capitalism 
itself.” 4 


496 



Negotiating with the Communists 


This heavy theoretical chaff was Stalin’s way of conveying a calming 
message to the capitalists, especially the United States. In effect, he was 
saying that the capitalists had no need to engage in pre-emptive war 
because the Soviet Union had no intention of posing a military challenge: 

... the capitalists, although they clamour, for “propaganda” purposes, 
about the aggressiveness of the Soviet Union, do not themselves believe 
that it is aggressive, because they are aware of the Soviet Union’s peace- 
ful policy and know that it will not itself attack capitalist countries. 5 

In other words, the capitalists should not misunderstand the rules of the 
game he was playing: Stalin wanted to enhance Soviet power and influ- 
ence, but he would stop his pressures well short of war. 

Whereas Stalin knew that his ideological pronouncements would suf- 
fice for his comrades, he was aware that his capitalist adversaries required 
more solid fare. If tensions were to be relaxed and there was to be any 
hope of returning to the old game of playing the capitalists off against 
each other, Moscow needed to ease at least some of the pressures that 
had led to what Stalin considered an artificial sense of unity within the 
capitalist world. 

Stalin made such an effort on the diplomatic level, and in a language 
the democracies could understand, when, on March 10, 1952, he put 
forward his so-called Peace Note on Germany. After years of confrontation 
and stonewalling, the Soviet Union suddenly seemed interested in a set- 
tlement. Calling attention to the absence of a peace treaty with Germany, 
Stalin submitted a draft text to the other three occupying powers, urging 
that it be considered “by an appropriate international conference with 
the participation of all interested governments” and concluded “in the 
nearest future.” 6 The Peace Note called for a unified, neutral Germany 
based on free elections, and one that would be allowed to maintain its 
own armed forces though all foreign troops would have to leave within 
a year. 

Nevertheless, the Peace Note contained enough escape clauses to hold 
up an agreement indefinitely, even if the West accepted the principle 
of German neutrality. For example, the draft prohibited “organizations 
inimical to democracy and the maintenance of peace,” which, in Soviet 
terminology, could have included all Western-style parties — as indeed it 
had already in Eastern Europe. Then, once the democracies agreed to 
come to the negotiating table, the Soviet negotiator, who would surely be 
the obdurate Molotov or an equivalent, would do his utmost to loosen 
Germany’s ties with the West — a Soviet benefit implicit in the acceptance 


497 



Diplomacy 


of the principle of neutrality — without paying the price of German unifi- 
cation. 

Yet the tone and precision of Stalin’s note suggested that his purpose 
transcended mere propaganda; rather, it seemed to be the opening move 
of a negotiation in which, for the first time in the postwar period, the 
Soviet Union might have been willing to pay a significant price for a 
relaxation of tensions. Rather uncharacteristically, Stalin’s Peace Note in- 
cluded a paragraph which indicated some flexibility: “In proposing con- 
sideration of this draft the Soviet Government . . . expressed its readiness 
also to consider other possible proposals on this question.” 7 

Had Stalin offered the so-called Peace Note four years earlier — before 
the Berlin blockade, the Czech coup, and the Korean War — it almost 
certainly would have stopped German membership in NATO in its tracks. 
Indeed, it is quite possible that German membership in the Atlantic Alli- 
ance would never have been considered. For the Note implied the sort 
of negotiation about the future of Europe that Churchill had been urging 
both during and after the war. 

In the interval since 1948, however, the Atlantic Alliance had been 
formed and German rearmament launched. The European Defense Com- 
munity (EDC), designed as a political framework for German rearma- 
ment, was being debated in European parliaments. In the Federal 
Republic, Adenauer had been elected Chancellor by only one vote (pre- 
sumably his own) in a secret ballot of the Parliament, and the opposition 
Social Democrats, though thoroughly democratic, were urging the pur- 
suit of unification instead of alliance with the West. 

The Western leaders realized that all these initiatives would surely be 
stalled if they explored the Soviet proposal and that, once stalled, they 
might never regain momentum. In several European parliaments, most 
significantly in France and Italy, the Communist Patties represented 
nearly a third of the vote — the same proportion the communists had had 
in Czechoslovakia before the coup. And Western European Communist 
Parties were passionately opposed to all measures of Atlantic and Euro- 
pean integration. Moreover, the treaty to determine the future of Austria 
was in its seventh year of negotiations, and the Korean armistice negotia- 
tions were already approaching their second year. For all the democracies 
knew, and for all we know at this writing, Stalin’s purpose in seeking to 
open negotiations could well have been to undermine allied cohesion 
and to consolidate the satellite orbit. 

This surely was Stalin’s optimum goal. The weight of the evidence, 
however, is that he was also prepared to explore an overall settlement. 
One indication that he was keeping this option open was his reaction to 
Western responses to his Peace Note. On March 25, the three Western 


498 



Negotiating with the Communists 


occupying powers — France, Great Britain, and the United States — re- 
turned identical replies, not with the goal of opening a negotiation but of 
bringing discussion of it to an end. They accepted the principle of Ger- 
man reunification but rejected the idea of neutrality. A unified Germany, 
they noted, should be free to enter “into associations compatible with the 
principles and purposes of the United Nations” — in other words, to re- 
main in NATO. The Western reply accepted the principle of free elections 
but tied it to such conditions as an immediate right to free assembly and 
free speech, both of which were likely to undermine the Soviet hold on 
the East German communist regime well before elections could be held. 8 
The Western Notes were designed to make a record, not to encourage a 
bargain. 

Uncharacteristically, Stalin responded immediately and in a concilia- 
tory tone. He reacted with the same speed, moreover, to every subse- 
quent rebuff by the democracies. The Western Note of March 25 was 
answered on April 9; that of May 13 received a response on May 24; that 
of July 10 was answered on August 23. Each Soviet reply edged toward 
the Western position. Only the note of September 23 did not receive a 
reply. 9 By then, Stalin was preoccupied with the forthcoming Nineteenth 
Party Congress and, no doubt, was awaiting the outcome of the American 
presidential election. 

Already in failing health, Stalin made a brief speech at the Party Con- 
gress which clothed a doctrine of peaceful coexistence in bellicose ideo- 
logical language. 10 Immediately following the Party Congress, in 
December 1952, Stalin announced that he was prepared to meet with 
President-elect Dwight D. Eisenhower. The offer of such a summit was 
something he had never vouchsafed to Roosevelt, Truman, or Churchill, 
each of whom Stalin had maneuvered into the position of having to make 
the first move. 

The simultaneous resumption of domestic purges inside the Soviet 
Union bore the grim and familiar imprint of an impending change in 
policy. Stalin had never felt comfortable implementing a new policy with 
personnel he had previously used to steer a different course, even if they 
had slavishly followed his own directives, and perhaps especially then. 
Stalin considered second thoughts to be the seeds of disloyalty and fa- 
vored the definitive remedy of destroying those who had had the respon- 
sibility of carrying out the policy that was about to be modified. In 1952, 
something along these lines was obviously in preparation, with the loyal- 
ists of previous years as the apparent targets — the Foreign Minister, Vya- 
cheslav Molotov; Lazar Kaganovich, an old Bolshevik member of the Polit- 
buro; and Lavrenti Beria, the head of the secret police. A new set of faces 
would appear to carry out Stalin’s diplomatic design. 


499 



Diplomacy 


The intent of Stalin’s diplomatic offensive was, at a minimum, to investi- 
gate what the Soviet Union might obtain for jettisoning the East German 
communist regime. Stalin had never recognized that regime as a full- 
fledged sovereign state, and had given it a status distinct from that of the 
other Eastern European satellites precisely to retain it as a bargaining 
chip should German unification ever be seriously negotiated. 

As far as Stalin was concerned, that moment might well have arrived in 
1952. By offering unification based on free elections, Stalin was signaling 
that the East German communist regime had become expendable. For, 
even if the communists dominated the East German elections, as the 
Western allies feared, the much larger population of the Federal Republic 
would have ensured a decisive victory for the pro-Western democratic 
parties. And, just as only Stalin himself could have had the willpower and 
ruthlessness to drive his exhausted people into confrontation with the 
democracies, he was also the sole communist leader with the authority 
to deal away a Soviet satellite. 

Whenever Stalin miscalculated, as he did on this occasion, it was be- 
cause he assumed that his counterparts were also conducting Realpolitik, 
and in the same cold-blooded fashion as he. In the immediate postwar 
period, he obviously thought that he could either intimidate them or, at 
the least, teach them that any attempt to exact concessions from the Soviet 
Union would be extremely painful and prolonged. But he also acted as if, 
when the time came to settle, the United States would do so on the basis 
of a calculation of existing conditions, unaffected by what had gone on 
before. Stalin seemed convinced that he would have to pay no price for 
having brutalized the democracies. 

These assumptions turned out to be grievously wrong. The United 
States was not conducting Realpolitik — at least not as Stalin understood 
it. To American leaders, moral maxims were real, and legal obligations 
were meaningful. Stalin may have conceived of the Berlin blockade as a 
way of strengthening his bargaining position over Germany, or perhaps 
even of triggering a negotiation. And he may have viewed the Korean War 
as a way of testing the boundaries of containment. But America resisted 
these acts of aggression in the name of principle, not in defense of a 
sphere of interest; America had exerted itself in order to remedy an insult 
to a universal cause, not over a challenge to the local status quo . 

Just as in 1945, when Stalin had treated America’s goodwill as of no 
measurable account, he underestimated in 1952 the extent of disillusion- 
ment his actions had generated in the interim. In the period from 1945 
to 1948, America’s leaders had been eager for a settlement with the Soviet 
Union but were neither willing nor able to assemble the pressures which 
Stalin would have taken seriously. By 1952, Stalin was taking America’s 


500 



Negotiating with the Communists 


pressures seriously enough, but had succeeded too well in convincing 
American leaders of his bad faith. They therefore interpreted his overture 
as merely one more tactic in a Cold War struggle which could only 
end in victory or defeat. Compromise with Stalin was no longer on the 
agenda. 

Stalin’s timing could not have been less propitious. His Peace Note was 
put forward less than eight months before a presidential election in which 
President Truman, the incumbent, was not running. In the highly improb- 
able event that Truman and Acheson were inclined to negotiate with 
Stalin, they would not have had enough time to complete the process. 

To the Truman Administration, the Peace Note in any event offered far 
less than met the eye. The problem lay less in its terms, which might have 
been adjusted, than in the kind of world it envisaged. Germany was to be 
neutral though armed, with all foreign troops withdrawn from its territory 
within a year. Yet what was the precise meaning of these terms? How was 
“neutrality” to be defined, and who would supervise it? Would the Soviet 
Union thereby gain a permanent voice in German affairs and perhaps a 
veto over them in the name of supervising Germany’s neutral status? And 
to what locations should the foreign troops be withdrawn? For the West- 
ern occupying forces, the answer was fairly clear — there was, in fact, no 
sustainable geographic base in Europe. In the 1950s, France might have 
been prepared to accept a major American force, but not for long and 
not without restrictions. Nor would the American Congress have ap- 
proved such a redeployment when a neutral buffer zone had been cre- 
ated between Soviet and American forces. Whereas American forces 
would have had to return to America, Soviet troops would have only been 
obliged to withdraw to the Polish frontier, a hundred miles to the east. In 
short, a literal application of Stalin’s proposal would have traded the 
dismantling of NATO, just as it was emerging, for a Soviet withdrawal of 
a mere one hundred miles. 

Even if the withdrawal clause had been interpreted to mean that Soviet 
troops should retreat to Soviet territory, new complications would have 
arisen. For it was unlikely that any of the satellite regimes could have 
sustained themselves without a Soviet troop presence or the certainty of 
Soviet intervention in the event of an uprising. Would Stalin have agreed 
to prohibit Soviet armies from re-entering Eastern Europe even if a com- 
munist government were being dismantled? Given the conditions prevail- 
ing in 1952, that question answered itself. It was beyond the imaginations 
of the democratic leaders — and justifiably so — that Stalin, the old Bolshe- 
vik, would agree to such an upheaval. 

But the most important reason Truman and Acheson cold-shouldered 
Stalin’s overture had to do with Germany’s long-term future as envisaged 


501 



Diplomacy 


by the Peace Note. For, even if it had been possible to define German 
neutrality in such a way as to forestall permanent Soviet intervention and 
a level of German arms that would not have left Germany at the mercy of 
the Soviet Union, this would only have restored what had been Europe’s 
dilemma since German unification in 1871. A strong, unified Germany in 
the center of the Continent pursuing a purely national policy had proved 
incompatible with the peace of Europe. Such a Germany would be 
stronger than any of the nations of Western Europe, and probably 
stronger than all of them combined. And in the 1950s, it would have been 
tempted by revisionist dreams in the East, spurred by 15 million recent 
refugees from territories which most Germans considered part of their 
country. It was tempting fate to turn loose a united, neutral Germany so 
soon after the war. Above all, such an outcome would have discredited 
the greatest German statesman since Bismarck, who bears the historic 
distinction of having guided Germany away from the legacy of Bismarck. 

Konrad Adenauer was born in 1876 in the Catholic Rhineland, which 
had only been part of Prussia since the Congress of Vienna and had, 
historically, had misgivings about the centralized German Reich ruled 
from Berlin. Adenauer had served as Lord Mayor of Cologne from 1917 
until he was removed by the Nazis in 1933. During the Hitler period, he 
withdrew from politics, spending some time in a monastery. Restored by 
the Allies as Lord Mayor of Cologne in March 1945, he was again dis- 
missed in late 1945, this time by the British occupation authorities who 
frowned on his independent manner. 

Possessed of the granitelike features of a Roman emperor, Adenauer 
also had the high cheekbones and slightly slanted eyes which suggested 
the hint of some Hun conqueror who might have trekked across the 
Rhineland in the previous millennium. Adenauer’s courtly behavior, ac- 
quired in his pre- World War I youth, reflected a serenity which was 
startling in the leader of an occupied country few of whose adult citizens 
were able to recall a political past in which they could take pride. 

In Adenauer’s office in the Palais Schaumburg, an ornate, white con- 
struction of the Wilhelmine period, the curtains were always drawn, mak- 
ing anyone entering it feel as if he were in a cocoon where time stood 
still. Serenity was the quality most needed in a leader whose mission was 
to give his country, which had every reason to doubt its past, the courage 
to face an uncertain future. By the time Adenauer had become Chancellor 
at the age of seventy-three, it seemed as if his entire life had been a 
preparation for the responsibility of restoring self-respect to his occupied, 
demoralized, and divided society. 

Adenauer’s sense of inner security derived more from faith than from 


502 



Negotiating with the Communists 


analysis. He was not a reader of books or a student of history like 
Churchill or de Gaulle. But he had spent his exile in reflection; he had 
gone through the school of his country’s convulsions and possessed an 
extraordinary intuition for the trends of his period. He also had a pene- 
trating understanding of the psychology of his contemporaries, especially 
their weaknesses. On one occasion, I recall Adenauer deploring the ab- 
sence of strong leaders in the Germany of the 1950s. When I responded 
by mentioning one of his more dramatic contemporaries, Adenauer re- 
plied in his lapidary manner: “Never confuse energy with strength.” 

Adenauer strove to overcome Germany’s turbulent passions by giving 
his country — with its history of extremism and its proclivity for the Ro- 
mantic — a reputation for reliability. Adenauer was old enough to remem- 
ber Bismarck as Chancellor. A devout Catholic son of the Rhineland, he 
had never cared for Realpolitik, not even when Germany was united, and 
he found the Kaiser’s grandiloquent Weltpolitik offensive to his own 
sober and matter-of-fact style. He had no affinity for the Junker class, 
which had created imperial Germany. He believed that Bismarck’s great 
error had been to base German security on the skill of maneuvering 
between East and West. In his view, a powerful, free-floating Germany in 
the center of Europe posed a threat to everybody at the expense of its 
own security. 

Adenauer’s response to the chaos of the immediate postwar world was 
that a divided, occupied country severed from its historic roots required 
a steady policy if it were to regain some control over its future. Adenauer 
refused to be diverted from this course by nostalgia for the past, or 
by the traditional German love-hate relationship with Russia. He opted 
unconditionally for the West, even at the price of postponing German 
unity. 

Adenauer’s domestic opponents, the Social Democrats, could point to 
an unblemished record of opposition to the Nazis. Their historic base of 
support was in the Soviet-occupied zone of Germany, which had been 
forced to become communist — a development the Social Democrats had 
courageously resisted. As suspicious of the containment policy as they 
were devoted to democracy, the Social Democrats assigned a higher 
priority to German unification than to Atlantic relationships. They fought 
Adenauer’s pro-Western orientation and would have gladly paid for prog- 
ress on Germany’s national aims by making a commitment to neutrality. 
(In the mid-1960s, the Social Democrats reversed course: they endorsed 
the Atlantic Alliance and entered a “grand coalition” with the Christian 
Democrats in 1966, though reserving more tactical flexibility toward the 
East than Adenauer’s Christian Democrats.) 


503 



Diplomacy 


Adenauer rejected the bargain on neutrality which the Social Demo- 
crats were willing to make, partly on philosophical grounds, but partly for 
cannily practical reasons. The aged Chancellor did not want to reawaken 
nationalist temptations, especially now that there were two German states, 
which, as Churchill had warned in his Iron Curtain speech, might put 
themselves up for auction. And he understood much better than his 
domestic opponents that, in the historical conditions of the time, a united, 
neutral Germany could only emerge from a peace settlement organized 
against Germany. Severe restrictions would be imposed on the new state, 
and international controls established. Powerful neighbors would have a 
permanent right of intervention. Adenauer considered this implicit subor- 
dination to be psychologically more dangerous for Germany than divi- 
sion. He opted for equality and integration with the West, and for 
respectability for his country. 

Whether Stalin could have overcome the reservations of Adenauer and 
of the other democratic leaders and pushed matters toward a major diplo- 
matic conference, or precisely what concessions, if any, he might have 
made there, will never be known. His proposal for a major conference 
would surely have been supported by Churchill. At any rate, Stalin’s death 
made all such speculations moot. Sometime between the early hours of 
March 1, 1953, when he parted from colleagues with whom he had 
watched a movie, and 3:00 am. on March 2, when he was found lying on 
the floor of his dacha, Stalin suffered a major stroke. The time at which 
he was stricken is imprecise because his guards were too afraid to enter 
his room before the appointed time, so he may well have lain on the 
floor for hours before he was discovered. Stalin’s associates — Malenkov 
and Beria, among others — kept vigil at his bedside until he died three 
and a half days later. 11 Doctors were summoned, although their ministra- 
tions could not have been free of ambivalence. They were, after all, 
the designated victims of Stalin’s forthcoming purge of the “Kremlin 
doctors.” 

Stalin’s successors felt a need for a respite from tensions with the West 
even more desperately than their former leader. However, they lacked 
his authority, his subtlety, his perseverance, and, most important, the 
political unity required to pursue so complicated a course. Stalin’s succes- 
sors were riven by the inevitable contest for power that followed. In the 
desperate war of all against all in which each tried to line up factions to 
support his own claim to authority, no one would accept responsibility 
for making concessions to the capitalists. This was evident from the way 
in which the purge of Beria was explained. In reality, his sin had been that 
he knew too much, and had threatened too many powerful colleagues. 


504 



Negotiating with the Communists 


Nonetheless, he was arrested at a Politburo meeting and executed shortly 
thereafter on the charge of having plotted to give up East Germany — 
even though the thrust of Stalin’s Peace Note of the previous year and of 
all his subsequent exchanges with the West had been heading in precisely 
that direction. 

According to Khrushchev’s memoirs, Stalin’s successors were deeply 
worried that the West might exploit Stalin’s death for the long-awaited 
showdown with the communist world Probably to discourage any 
thoughts of a coup, the tyrant had frequently warned his associates that 
the West would wring their necks like chickens after he was gone. 12 At 
the same time, Stalin’s heirs’ suspicions of the West were offset by the 
demands of their desperate struggle for power with each other. Even 
though the new leadership longed for a reprieve from the Cold War, 
every contestant for power knew that diplomatic flexibility could prove 
fatal until he had achieved absolute authority. But they were also uneasy 
about a continuation of tensions. In 1946, Churchill had remarked that 
Stalin wanted the fruits of war without war; in 1953, Stalin’s successors 
sought the fruits of a relaxation of tensions without being willing or able 
to make concessions. In 1945, Stalin had produced a diplomatic deadlock 
to preserve his bargaining position vis4-vis the West; in 1953, his heirs 
took refuge in a diplomatic deadlock to preserve their options vis-a-vis 
each other. 

When statesmen want to gain time, they offer to talk. On March 16, a 
little more than a week after the dictator’s death, Malenkov, who was now 
Prime Minister, invited negotiations without specifying their content: 

At present there is no litigious or unsolved question which could not 
be settled by peaceful means on the basis of mutual agreement of 
the countries concerned. This concerns our relations with all States, 
including the United States of America . 13 

But Malenkov made no concrete proposals. The new Soviet leaders were 
uncertain about how to achieve a relaxation of tensions and had much 
less authority than Stalin had had to forge new approaches. At the same 
time, the new Eisenhower Administration was as apprehensive about 
offering to negotiate with the Soviets as the Soviets were about offering 
concessions to the Americans. 

The reason for the apprehension was the same on either side of the 
dividing line — both the Soviet Union and the United States dreaded un- 
charted territory. Each had trouble assimilating the changes which had 
occurred in the international environment since the end of the war. The 


505 



Diplomacy 


Kremlin was afraid that abandoning East Germany might unravel the 
satellite orbit — as it did a generation later. And, short of giving up East 
Germany, a genuine relaxation of tensions was not in the cards. The 
United States was concerned that opening up discussions on Germany 
might wreck NATO and, in effect, trade the Alliance for a conference. 

To decide whether the West in fact lost any opportunity immediately 
after Stalin s death, three questions must be answered. Could the Atlantic 
Alliance have conducted a major negotiation with the Soviets without 
fragmenting? If pressed, would the Soviet Union have made meaningful 
offers? Would the Soviet leadership have exploited the negotiations as a 
way of stopping German rearmament and Western integration without in 
fact giving up its East German satellite or easing its hold on Eastern 
Europe? 

American leaders were right in their assessment that the actual margin 
for negotiations was extremely narrow. A neutral Germany would have 
posed either a danger or an invitation to blackmail. There are some 
experiments in diplomacy which cannot be tried because failure invites 
irreversible risk. And the risk of a collapse of all that had been built in 
the Atlantic Alliance was significant. 

It was in fact in everyone’s interest — above all, in the Soviet Union’s — 
that the Federal Republic remain part of the Western integrated system, 
though none of the insecure Soviet leaders were in a position to admit 
this. If Germany remained in the Atlantic Alliance, it was possible to agree 
to limitations of military deployment along the new lines of demarcation 
(thus, in effect, reducing the military potential of the unified Germany). 
But if the neutral territory embraced all of Germany, NATO would be 
emasculated and Central Europe would turn into either a vacuum or a 
potential threat. 

Stalin’s heirs could have been induced to accept a united Germany 
inside NATO (albeit with military restrictions) only if the democracies 
had been prepared to threaten military consequences or, at a minimum, 
an intensification of the Cold War. This was what Churchill, who had 
returned to office as Prime Minister in 1951, may have had in mind even 
while Stalin was still alive, as recorded by his private secretary, John 
Colville: 


W[inston] has several times revealed to me his hopes of a joint approach 
to Stalin, proceeding perhaps to a congress in Vienna where the Pots- 
dam Conference would be reopened and concluded. If the Russians 
were unco-operative, the cold war would be intensified by us: “Our 
young men,” W. said to me, “would as soon be killed carrying truth as 
death.” 14 


506 



Negotiating with the Communists 


But no other leader in the West was willing to run such risks, or to put 
forward proposals which could be easily attacked by critics of the Alliance 
for being too one-sided. America’s leaders therefore stonewalled any 
major initiative, and, in the process, prevented a serious attempt to exploit 
the Soviets’ confusion immediately after Stalin’s death. On the other hand, 
they preserved the cohesion of the Atlantic Alliance. 

The price of this stalemate was a shift of the debate away from the 
substance of negotiations to their desirability. And it was Churchill, now 
nearing the end of his career, who emerged as chief spokesman for a 
negotiation whose content he never described precisely. There was in- 
deed a certain poignancy to the octogenarian Churchill, who had 
throughout his life been the exponent of the balance of power, pressing 
for a summit meeting as an end in itself. 

American leaders unfairly ascribed Churchill’s eagerness to negotiate 
to approaching senility. In fact, Churchill had been remarkably consistent, 
having advocated negotiations both during and immediately after the war 
as well as when the containment policy was first being formulated (see 
chapters 17 and 18). What had changed were the conditions under which 
these proposals were being made. In the 1950s, Churchill never spelled 
out the details of the global settlement he was urging. During the war, it 
seemed to have been based on the assumption that America would with- 
draw, or at any rate never station troops in Europe, as Roosevelt had 
insisted repeatedly. Then, and as the leader of the Opposition between 
1945 and 1951, Churchill apparently envisaged the following components 
of an overall settlement with the Soviet Union: a neutral, unified Ger- 
many, a Western alliance system along the Franco-German frontier, the 
retreat of Soviet forces to the Polish-Soviet frontier, and the establishment 
of governments based on the Finnish model in the states bordering the 
Soviet Union — that is, neutral, democratic governments respectful of So- 
viet concerns but essentially free to pursue their own independent for- 
eign policies. 

A settlement along these lines before 1948 would have restored Europe 
to its historic dimensions. During the war and for several years afterward, 
Churchill was far ahead of his time. Had he not lost the 1945 election, he 
might well have given the emerging Cold War a different direction — 
provided that America and the other allies had been willing to risk the 
confrontation which seemed to underlie Churchill’s preferred strategy. 

Yet by 1952, the settlement which Churchill envisaged had become 
nearly impossible, short of a political earthquake. It is a measure of 
Adenauer’s greatness that the kind of Federal Republic he had created 
would have been nearly unimaginable prior to 1949. Three years later, 
the world Churchill had envisaged after 1944 would have required end- 


507 



Diplomacy 


ing the Federal Republic’s integration with the West and obliging it to 
return to its former status as a freewheeling national state. In 1945, Finn- 
ish-type regimes in Eastern Europe would have been a return to nor- 
malcy. By 1952, they could no longer have been established by 
negotiation; they could only have come about through a Soviet collapse 
or a major confrontation. That confrontation, moreover, would have had 
to be conducted over the issue of German unification — and no Western 
European country was prepared to run such a risk on behalf of a defeated 
enemy so soon after the war. 

Had the Atlantic Alliance been a single nation capable of conducting a 
unified policy, it might have adopted a diplomacy that sought an overall 
settlement along Churchill’s lines. But in 1952, the Atlantic Alliance was 
far too fragile for such a gamble. Presidents from both of America’s major 
political parties perceived no choice but to pursue their painful course 
of waiting for a Soviet change of heart behind positions of strength. 

Eisenhower’s new Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, perceived the 
East-West conflict as a moral issue and sought to avoid negotiations on 
almost any subject until a basic transformation of the Soviet system had 
occurred — thereby challenging long-established British views. In its en- 
tire history, Great Britain had not often had the luxury of confining nego- 
tiations to friendly or ideologically compatible countries. Not having 
enjoyed anything like America’s margin of safety even at the height of its 
power, Great Britain negotiated with ideological adversaries as a matter 
of course regarding practical arrangements relating to coexistence. 
Throughout, a clear working definition of the national interest had en- 
abled the British public to judge the effectiveness of its statesmen. The 
British might experience occasional domestic disputes over the terms of 
a particular settlement, but almost never over the wisdom of negotiating. 

True to British tradition, Churchill sought a more tolerable coexistence 
with the Soviet Union by way of near-permanent negotiations. American 
leaders, on the other hand, wanted to change the Soviet system rather 
than negotiate with it. Thus, the Anglo-American debate increasingly 
turned into a dialogue about the desirability rather than the substance of 
negotiations. During his 1950 electoral campaign, which ended in defeat, 
Churchill proposed a Four-Power summit — a revolutionary idea at that 
stage of the Cold War: 

Still I cannot help coming back to this idea of another talk with Soviet 
Russia upon the highest level. The idea appeals to me of a supreme 
effort to bridge the gulf between the two worlds, so that each can live 
their life, if not in friendship at least without the hatreds of the cold 
war. 15 


508 



Negotiating with the Communists 


Dean Acheson, fresh from founding the Atlantic Alliance, thought such an 
enterprise premature: 

The only way to deal with the Soviet Union, we have found from hard 
experience, is to create situations of strength [W]hen we have elimi- 

nated all the areas of weakness that we can — we will be able to evolve 

working agreements with the Russians No good would come from 

our taking the initiative in calling for conversations at this point 16 

Churchill did not return as Prime Minister until October 1951, and chose 
not to press for a summit meeting for the remainder of Truman’s term in 
office. He decided instead to await the new administration, to be led by 
his old wartime comrade Dwight D. Eisenhower. In the interval, he fell 
in with the prevailing tendency of justifying summits on the ground that, 
no matter who the Soviet leader was, he would prove receptive to a high- 
level agreement. In 1952, that leader was Stalin. In June of that year, 
Churchill told John Colville that, if Eisenhower were elected, he would 
“have another shot at making peace by means of a meeting of the Big 
Three. ... He thought that while Stalin lived we were far safer from attack 
than if he died and his lieutenants started scrambling for the succes- 
sion.” 17 

When Stalin died shortly after Eisenhower became President, Churchill 
advocated negotiations with the new Soviet leader. Eisenhower, however, 
proved no more receptive to Churchill’s idea of reopening talks with the 
Soviets than his predecessor had been. Reacting to Malenkov’s overture 
of March 17, 1953, Churchill urged Eisenhower on April 5 not to miss any 
chance “of finding out how far the Malenkov regime are prepared to go 
in easing things up all around.” 18 Eisenhower’s response was to ask 
Churchill to await a policy statement he was planning to deliver before 
the American Society of Newspaper Editors on April 16 which, in effect, 
rejected Churchill’s premise. 19 Eisenhower argued that the causes of ten- 
sion were as familiar as the remedies: a Korean armistice, an Austrian 
State Treaty, and “an end to the direct and indirect attacks upon the 
security of Indochina and Malaya.” He thereby lumped China and the 
Soviet Union together, which was a wrong assessment of Sino-Soviet 
relations, as later events would show, and produced clearly unfulfillable 
conditions since events in Malaysia and Indochina were largely outside 
Soviet control. No negotiations were necessary, Eisenhower said: it was a 
time for deeds, not words. 

Viewing a draft of Eisenhower’s speech in advance, Churchill worried 
that “a sudden frost nipped spring in the bud” Then, to show that he was 
unpersuaded by Eisenhower’s arguments, he proposed a meeting of the 


509 



Diplomacy 


Potsdam powers — the United States, Great Britain, and the U.S.S.R. — to 
be preceded by a preparatory session between Churchill and Molotov, 
who had recently been reinstated as the Soviet Foreign Minister. Helpfully 
enclosing a draft of the invitation in his letter to Eisenhower, Churchill 
appealed to an improbable bond of friendship between himself and Mo- 
lotov: 

... we could renew our own war-time relation and ... I could meet 
Monsieur Malenkov and others of your leading men. Naturally I do not 
imagine that we could settle any of the grave issues which overhang the 
immediate future of the world. ... I should of course make it clear I 
was not expecting any major decisions at this informal meeting but only 
to restore an easy and friendly basis between us. . . . 20 

To Eisenhower, however, a summit spelled a dangerous concession to 
the Soviets. Somewhat testily, he reiterated his demand that the Soviets 
meet some preconditions: 

In my note to you of April twenty-fifth I expressed the view that we 
should not rush things too much and should not permit feeling in our 
countries for a meeting between heads of states and government to 
press us into precipitate initiatives 21 

Though Churchill disagreed, he recognized that his country’s depen- 
dence on the United States did not permit him the luxury of freewheeling 
initiatives on matters about which Washington felt so strongly. Without 
communicating directly with Malenkov, he did the next-best thing by 
telling the House of Commons much of what he might have conveyed to 
the Soviet Prime Minister in private. On May 11, 1953, he defined how his 
analysis differed from that of Eisenhower and Dulles: whereas the Ameri- 
can leaders feared jeopardizing the cohesion of the Atlantic Alliance and 
the rearmament of Germany, Churchill was above all reluctant to jeopar- 
dize a more hopeful evolution within the Soviet Union: 

... it would be a pity if the natural desire to reach a general settlement 
of international policy were to impede any spontaneous and healthy 
evolution which may be taking place inside Russia. I have regarded 
some of the internal manifestations and the apparent change of mood 
as far more important and significant than what has happened outside. 

I am anxious that nothing in the presentation of foreign policy by the 
N A TO. Powers should, as it were, supersede or take the emphasis out 
of what may be a profound movement of Russian feeling. 22 


510 



Negotiating with the Communists 


Prior to Stalin’s death, Churchill had urged negotiations because he had 
deemed Stalin to be the Soviet leader best able to guarantee the fulfill- 
ment of what he had promised. Now Churchill was urging a summit in 
order to preserve the hopeful prospects that had arisen after the dictator s 
death. In other words, negotiations were needed no matter what hap- 
pened within the Soviet Union or who controlled the Soviet hierarchy. A 
conference at the highest level, Churchill urged, could settle the princi- 
ples and direction of future negotiations: 

This conference should not be overhung by a ponderous or rigid 
agenda, or led into mazes and jungles of technical details, zealously 
contested by hordes of experts and officials drawn up in vast, cumbrous 
array. The conference should be confined to the smallest number of 
Powers and persons possible. ... It might well be that no hard-faced 
agreements would be reached, but there might be a general feeling 
among those gathered together that they might do something better 
than tear the human race, including themselves, into bits. 23 

But what exactly did Churchill have in mind? How were the leaders to 
express their decision not to commit collective suicide? The only con- 
crete proposal Churchill put forward was an agreement similar to the 
1925 Locarno Pact, in which Germany and France had accepted each 
other’s frontiers and Great Britain had guaranteed each side against ag- 
gression by the other (see chapter 11). 

It was not a good example. Locarno had lasted a mere decade, and it 
had never resolved a single crisis. The notion that Great Britain, or any 
nation, could be so indifferent about the substance of potential controver- 
sies as to guarantee at one and the same time (and via the same instru- 
ment) the border of both an ally and a major adversary had been bizarre 
enough in 1925, and it had not improved any in the era of ideological 
conflict which prevailed three decades later. Who would guarantee which 
frontier against what danger? Were the Potsdam powers to guarantee all 
frontiers in Europe against all aggression? In that case, diplomacy would 
have returned full circle to Roosevelt’s idea of the Four Policemen. Or 
did it mean that resistance was prohibited unless all the Potsdam powers 
concurred? In that case, the idea would serve as a carte blanche for Soviet 
aggression. Since the United States and the Soviet Union each regarded 
the other superpower as the chief security problem, how could a joint 
guarantee be a solution for both? Locarno had been designed as the 
alternative to a military alliance between France and Great Britain, and 
had been presented that way before Parliament and public. Would the 
new agreement modeled on Locarno dissolve existing alliances? 


511 



Diplomacy 


Churchill’s case, however, did not depend on any particular negotiating 
position. On July 1, 1953, he rejected the theory that the Kremlin’s poli- 
cies were immutable and that the Soviet Union was somehow the first 
society to become immune to the erosion of history. According to 
Churchill, the West’s dilemma resided in a combination of its refusal 
to recognize the Soviet satellite orbit and its unwillingness to risk war to 
undo it. The only way out was by launching a “reconnaissance in force” 
to determine the implications of the new Soviet reality. He wrote to 
Eisenhower: 

I have no more intention than I had at Fulton or in 1945 of being fooled 
by the Russians. I think however there is a change in the world balance, 
largely through American action and re armament, but also through the 
ebb of Communist philosophy, which justifies a cold-blooded, factual 
study by the free nations while keeping united and strong. 24 

Churchill’s hope was that “ten years of easement plus productive science 
might make a different world .” 25 Churchill was no longer proposing a 
global settlement but a policy which later came to be called “detente.” 
Churchill had recognized that the difficulty with containment in its origi- 
nal version was that, however powerful its analysis, its practical imple- 
mentation amounted to endurance for its own sake until that distant day 
when the Soviet system somehow transformed itself. Containment might 
well imply an impressive destination, but it offered little in the way of 
sustenance along the journey. Its alternative was an immediate compre- 
hensive settlement, which implied an easier journey to a less attractive 
destination but also risked the cohesion of the Atlantic Alliance and Ger- 
many’s integration into the West — an exorbitant price for any foreseeable 
quid pro quo unless the German leaders themselves demanded it. What 
Churchill was now proposing was a middle ground — peaceful coexis- 
tence, to permit the erosion of time and to ease Soviet long-range policy. 

The psychological strain of an era of confrontation without issue was 
evidenced by the changed attitude of George F. Kennan. Realizing that 
his original approach to the Soviet Union was turning into a rationale for 
endless military confrontation, he developed a concept for negotiating an 
overall settlement very similar to what Churchill had seemed to have had 
in mind in 1944-45. 

The principal goal of Kennan’s so-called disengagement scheme was 
the removal of Soviet troops from the center of Europe. For this, Kennan 
was prepared to pay with a comparable withdrawal of American forces 
from Germany. Arguing passionately that Germany would be able to 


512 



Negotiating with the Communists 


defend itself with conventional weapons, as it had always done, especially 
if Soviet armies had to cross Eastern Europe before reaching Germany’s 
borders, Kennan deplored excessive reliance on nuclear strategy. He 
supported a proposal by the Polish Foreign Minister, Adam Rapacki, for a 
nuclear-free zone in Central Europe comprising Germany, Poland, and 
Czechoslovakia. 26 

The difficulty with both the Kennan and the Rapacki schemes was 
the same as with Stalin’s Peace Note: they would have traded German 
integration into the West for Soviet withdrawal from East Germany and 
parts of Eastern Europe, which, unless coupled with guarantees against 
Soviet intervention to protect communist regimes, would have led to a 
dual crisis: one in Eastern Europe, and another in finding a responsible 
national role for Germany, which had proved elusive since its unification 
in 1871. 27 In light of the conventional wisdom of the time, the Rapacki- 
Kennan concept of trading an American withdrawal of 3,000 miles for a 
Soviet withdrawal of a few hundred miles ran the additional risk of put- 
ting a premium on the weapons category, in which the Soviet Union 
was perceived to be preponderant, while stigmatizing nuclear weapons, 
which, at a minimum, made aggression incalculable. This was my own 
view at the time. 28 

Churchill, as so often before, had the right insight even if, for once, he 
did not have the appropriate remedy. The democratic publics would not 
be willing to sustain confrontation indefinitely unless their governments 
had first demonstrated beyond doubt that all the alternatives to conflict 
had been explored. If the democracies failed to develop a concrete pro- 
gram to ease tensions with the Soviets, both their publics and their gov- 
ernments ran the risk of being seduced by peace offensives in which the 
long-awaited transformation of Soviet society would be proclaimed on 
the basis of nothing more substantial than a change in Soviet tone. If the 
democracies were to avoid oscillating between extremes of intransigence 
and conciliation, they would have to conduct their diplomacy within a 
narrow margin: between an endless confrontation that was becoming 
increasingly oppressive as nuclear stockpiles grew on both sides, and a 
kind of diplomacy which tranquilized people’s perceptions of the Cold 
War without really improving the actual situation. 

The democracies were in fact in a strong position to operate within 
this narrow range, because their sphere of influence was far stronger 
than the Soviets’, and because the economic and social gap between the 
superpowers was only likely to widen. History seemed to be on their 
side, provided they were able to combine imagination with discipline. 
This, at any rate, was the reasoning behind the later detente policy of 


513 



Diplomacy 


Nixon (see chapter 28). It was in fact the implication of Churchill’s fall- 
back position in his letter to Eisenhower of July 1, 1953, when he spoke 
of “ten years of easement plus productive science” making for a better 
world. 

Along with Adenauer, John Foster Dulles was the Western statesman 
who most firmly opposed risking the hard-won cohesion of the West in 
fluid negotiations. Dulles’ assessment of the danger of what Stalin had 
proposed and which the disengagement theorists later put forward was 
essentially correct. Yet he also created a psychological vulnerability by 
arguing that the best way to preserve Western cohesion was to avoid 
negotiations altogether — as evidenced from this note of caution to a 
White House speech-writer in April 1953: 

. . . there’s some real danger of our just seeming to fall in with these 
Soviet overtures. It’s obvious that what they are doing is because of 
outside pressures, and I don’t know anything better we can do than 
keep up these pressures right now. 29 

With such pronouncements, Dulles reached the limits of the containment 
policy. Democratic societies needed some purpose beyond endurance in 
order to justify the Cold War. Though the political programs on the table 
were incompatible with the interests of the democracies, an alternative 
political conception of a peaceful evolution of Central Europe was 
needed — some program that emphasized keeping Germany inside West- 
ern institutions together with measures to ease tensions along the divid- 
ing line across Europe. Dulles avoided addressing this need, preferring 
to stalemate foreign ministers’ talks with familiar positions in order to 
gain time for the consolidation of the Atlantic Alliance and the rearma- 
ment of Germany. For Dulles, such a policy avoided discord among the 
allies; for the confused post-Stalin leadership, it spared them the strain of 
having to make painful decisions. 

Once Soviet leaders had realized that the democracies would not press 
Central European issues, they sought the much-needed respite with the 
West by concentrating on what Eisenhower and Dulles had defined as 
tests of good faith: Korea, Indochina, and the Austrian State Treaty. Instead 
of serving as the admission tickets to a negotiation on Europe, which 
Churchill had sought in 1953, these agreements came to substitute for 
them. In January 1954, a foreign ministers’ meeting on the subject of 
Germany quickly deadlocked. Dulles and Molotov had in fact arrived at 
identical conclusions. Neither wished to engage in a fluid diplomacy; 
each preferred the consolidation of his own sphere of influence over a 
more adventurous foreign policy. 


514 



Negotiating with the Communists 


The positions of the two sides were not symmetrical, however. Stale- 
mate served Moscow’s immediate tactical and internal purposes, but it 
played into the hands of America’s long-range strategy — even if all of the 
American leaders did not fully understand this. Since the United States 
and its allies were bound to win an arms race and their sphere of influ- 
ence had the greater economic potential, properly conceived Soviet long- 
range purposes actually required a genuine easing of tensions and a 
realistic settlement of Central European issues. Molotov avoided making 
concessions which, however painful, might haw saved the Soviet Union 
from strategic overextension and eventual collapse; Dulles avoided flexi- 
bility, for which he paid the price of needless domestic controversy and 
vulnerability to Soviet cosmetic peace offensives, but which also laid the 
basis for America’s ultimate strategic victory. 

Dulles used the respite to pursue his goal of integrating Germany into 
NATO. The problem of how to fit the Federal Republic into the Western 
military structure was nettlesome. The French were none too eager to 
see a fully rearmed Germany, nor did they want to sacrifice their national 
defense for an integrated Western defense which included Germany. For 
that would have meant partly putting the defense of their country in the 
hands of those who had ravaged France only a decade before, and it 
would have constricted France’s ability to pursue its colonial wars. This 
was the reason why the plan for a European Defense Community foun- 
dered on French resistance. Dulles and Anthony Eden therefore turned 
to the alternative of simply integrating the Federal Republic of Germany 
into NATO. Under pressure, Paris went along while insisting that Great 
Britain commit itself to the permanent stationing of British troops on 
German soil. When Eden agreed to this proposal, France was given the 
concrete military assurances which the British had so consistently refused 
after the First World War. Henceforth, the British, French, and American 
troops were stationed in Germany as allies of the Federal Republic. What 
had started out as Stalin’s initiative to end the division of Germany (for a 
time, vaguely endorsed by Churchill) ended up confirming the division 
of Europe. Ironically, Churchill, the apostle of spheres of influence, in 
the end sought to soften their impact and perhaps to eliminate them 
altogether; while Dulles, the Secretary of State of the country forever 
inveighing against spheres of influence, turned out to be the chief spokes- 
man for the policy that froze them in place. 

America, having become confident about the solidarity of its sphere, 
now felt it was safe to talk to the Russians. The fact was, however, that, 
with American and Soviet blocs in Europe consolidated, there was less 
and less to talk about. Both sides felt sufficiently at liberty to hold a 


515 



Diplomacy 


summit, not in order to settle the Cold War, but precisely because they 
knew it would avoid all the fundamental issues. Churchill had retired, the 
Federal Republic was ensconced in NATO, and the Soviet Union had 
decided that preserving its sphere of influence in Eastern Europe was 
safer than trying to lure the Federal Republic away from its Western ties. 

Thus the Geneva Summit of July 1955 proved to be a far cry from what 
Churchill had originally proposed. Instead of reviewing the causes of 
tension, the leaders attending the Summit barely mentioned the issues 
which had produced the Cold War. The agenda oscillated between at- 
tempting to score propaganda points and relegating the solution of East- 
West problems to amateur psychology. Eisenhower’s “open-skies” pro- 
posal for aerial reconnaissance of each other’s territories risked little; for 
it would have told the Soviets nothing they did not already know from 
their intelligence and public sources, while unveiling the enigma of the 
Soviet empire to American reconnaissance. I know from personal experi- 
ence that the policy planners in the Eisenhower entourage who designed 
it — mostly under the auspices of Nelson Rockefeller, who was then a 
presidential adviser — would have been amazed had it been accepted. 
Nor did its rejection by Khrushchev entail any penalties for the Soviet 
Union. The issue of the future of Central Europe was passed on to the 
foreign ministers without guidelines. 

The major result of the Summit was to demonstrate the democracies’ 
psychological need for a respite from a decade of confrontation. Having 
held firm in the face of Stalin’s earlier, specific proposals, the democra- 
cies now succumbed to a change in Soviet tone. They were like the 
marathon runner who, within sight of the finish line, sits down exhausted 
at the roadside and permits his competitors to catch up. 

Eisenhower and Dulles had skillfully and tenaciously defused the resi- 
due of Stalin’s Peace Note and of Churchill’s eloquent calls for a summit 
by insisting on specific solutions to equally specific problems. Yet, in the 
end, they concluded that waiting for an internal Soviet change to occur 
conveyed too stern a message, and that devising alternative negotiating 
positions might prove too divisive. Containment could only be sustained 
by offering their people some hope for an end to the Cold War. But, 
instead of coming up with a political program of their own, they fell in 
with what they had heretofore feared: the growing tendency to interpret 
Khrushchev’s and Bulganin’s less challenging style as a sign of a basic 
change in Soviet attitudes. The mere fact that a nonconfrontational meet- 
ing had occurred — however skimpy on substance — fueled the democra- 
cies’ hope that the long-predicted Soviet transformation was in train. 

Even before the summit assembled, Eisenhower had set the tone for 


516 



Negotiating with the Communists 


the meeting. Abandoning his Administration’s former insistence on con- 
crete and detailed progress, he cast the goals of East-West diplomacy in 
largely psychological terms: 

Our many postwar conferences have been characterized too much by 
attention to details, by an effort apparently to work on specific prob- 
lems, rather than to establish a spirit and attitude in which to approach 
them . 30 

Media reaction was ecstatic and converged on the proposition that some- 
thing fundamental had taken place at the summit, though exactly what 
that was remained obscure. “Mr. Eisenhower had done even better than 
defeat an enemy in battle as had been his assignment a decade ago,” read 
an editorial in The New York Times. “He had done something to prevent 

battles from happening Other men might have played strength against 

strength. It was Mr. Eisenhower’s gift to draw others into the circle of his 
good will and to modify the attitudes if not the policies of the little band 
of visitors from the other side of the Elbe .” 31 

Even Dulles was carried away by the “spirit” of Geneva. “Up until the 
time of Geneva,” he told British Foreign Secretary Harold Macmillan two 
months later, “Soviet policy was based on intolerance which was the 
keynote of Soviet doctrine. Soviet policy is now based on tolerance which 
includes good relations with everyone ” 32 The summit and its sur- 

rounding atmosphere had become their own rewards. 

Entering into the spirit of things, Harold Macmillan argued that the 
true significance of the Geneva Summit had resided not in any specific 
agreement but in the personal relations that it had helped to establish 
among the leaders. Even in the homeland of balance-of-power diplomacy, 
atmosphere was being elevated into the key element of foreign policy: 

Why did this meeting send a thrill of hope and expectation round the 
world? It wasn’t that the discussions were specially remarkable. . . . What 
struck the imagination of the world was the fact of the friendly meeting 
between the Heads of the two great groups into which the world is 
divided. These men, carrying their immense burdens, met and talked 

and joked together like ordinary mortals I cannot help thinking that 

last summer’s Geneva idyll was not a vague or sham affair . 33 

If only history were more forgiving. American leaders had been right in 
their earlier assessment that the Cold War was the result of Soviet actions 
and not of Soviet rhetoric or personal conduct. The refusal of leaders on 


517 



Diplomacy 


both sides to address the causes of the tension was bound to perpetuate 
them and to make them fester. If a mere meeting could have such impact 
on Western opinion, what incentive remained for the Soviets to make 
substantive concessions? Indeed, none would appear on any political 
issue for the next decade and a half. 

The spheres of influence on either side of the German dividing line 
congealed. Between the time of NATOs founding and the opening of 
negotiations between the democracies and the Soviet Union, which led 
to the Helsinki Accords of 1975, the only political negotiations were those 
triggered by Soviet ultimatums over Berlin. Diplomacy moved increas- 
ingly into the field of arms control, which was the reverse side of the 
“positions-of-strength” approach. Its advocates sought to turn the limita- 
tion or control of armaments into a substitute for political dialogue; or, 
in the language of containment, to limit positions of strength to the lowest 
level compatible with deterrence. But, just as positions of strength would 
not automatically translate into negotiations, arms control did not auto- 
matically translate into a relaxation of tensions. 

Even as the Geneva Summit was being hailed in the West as the begin- 
ning of a thaw in the Cold War, it had been ushering in the Cold War’s 
most dangerous phase. For Soviet leaders had drawn quite different con- 
clusions from it than the leaders of the democracies. Stalin’s heirs had 
come into their own in the midst of general confusion and uncertainty 
about whether the democracies might exploit the general disarray to 
reverse Soviet postwar conquests. Yet, by June 1953, a mere three months 
after the tyrant’s death, they had managed to put down an uprising in East 
Berlin, which was technically a four-power city, without any reaction 
from the West. They had procrastinated over German unification without 
encountering resistance, and communist political control of Central and 
Eastern Europe was being challenged only rhetorically. Finally, at the 
Geneva Summit they had received a certificate of good conduct without 
engaging in a serious exploration of any of the issues which had led to 
the Cold War. 

Dedicated Marxists, they drew the only conclusion compatible with 
their ideology: that the correlation of forces was moving in their favor. 
No doubt this belief was reinforced by the Soviets’ growing, albeit still 
relatively small, stockpile of nuclear weapons and their development of 
the hydrogen bomb. In his memoirs, Khrushchev summarized the sum- 
mit: “. . . our enemies now realized that we were able to resist their 
pressure and see through their tricks.” 34 In February 1956, seven months 
after the summit, at the same Party Congress at which he castigated Stalin, 
Khrushchev sized up the international environment in a manner which 
deprecated the democracies: 


518 



Negotiating with the Communists 


The general crisis of capitalism continues to deepen The interna- 

tional camp of socialism is exerting ever-growing influence on the 
course of world events — The position of the imperialist forces is 
growing weaker 35 

The basic cause of the misunderstanding between the leaders of the 
democracies and their counterparts in the U.S.S.R. was the former’s insis- 
tence on applying to the Soviet nomenklatura the criteria drawn from 
their own domestic experience. It was a profound misconception. The 
second generation of Soviet leaders had been shaped by a past that would 
have been unimaginable in the democracies. Apprenticeship to Stalin 
had guaranteed psychological malformation. Only the salve of boundless 
ambition could have made tolerable the pervasive sense of terror gener- 
ated by the penalty of death or life in the Gulag for the slightest misstep 
— or even for a shift in policy by the dictator himself. 

The generation which grew up under Stalin could reduce its risks only 
by servility to the master’s whims and by the systematic denunciation of 
colleagues. They made their nightmarish existence more tolerable by a 
passionate belief in the system to which they owed their careers. Not 
until the next generation would Soviet leaders experience the shocks of 
disillusionment. 

As the material on Stalin in Gromyko’s memoirs reveals, Stalin’s subor- 
dinates were aware of the atrocities being committed in the name of 
communism. 36 Yet they assuaged their consciences, which in any case 
were not terribly highly developed, by ascribing Stalinism to the aberra- 
tions of an individual rather than to the failure of the communist system. 
Besides, they had little opportunity for systematic reflection because Sta- 
lin had seen to it that his top leadership was in a state of constant flux. 
And the loss of position in Stalin’s regime did not signal the advent of a 
normal life in the “private sector”; for the fortunate few who managed to 
survive, it meant public disgrace and complete isolation from erstwhile 
colleagues. 

The morbid suspiciousness which had become a way of life in the 
Soviet nomenklatura characterized their conduct in the immediate post- 
Stalin phase as well. Stalin’s successors spent nearly five years in their 
struggle for succession: in 1953, Beria was executed; in 1955, Malenkov 
was removed from office; in 1957, Khrushchev defeated the so-called anti- 
party group of Molotov, Kaganovich, Shepilov, and Malenkov, and by 1958 
he attained absolute power after the dismissal of Zhukov. This turmoil 
made a relaxation of tensions with the West a necessity for the Kremlin 
leadership, though it did not keep it from selling arms to Egypt or sup- 
pressing the Hungarian Revolution. 


519 



Diplomacy 


The change in tone of the Soviet leadership did not translate into 
acceptance of Western notions of peaceful coexistence. In 1954, when 
Malenkov spoke of the danger of nuclear war, he may well have exhibited 
the first stirrings of the Soviets’ recognition of the realities of the Nuclear 
Age. It is equally possible that he was attempting to undermine the de- 
mocracies’ confidence in the weapon on which they were basing their 
security. Khrushchev’s condemnation of Stalin may have signaled a soften- 
ing of communism, but he clearly used it as well as a weapon against 
Stalin’s former associates, who represented his principal opposition, and 
as a means of achieving control over the Communist Party. 

It is true that Khrushchev had the courage to purge Beria, or at least 
that he recognized the need to do so for the sake of his own survival; and 
he fitfully experimented with both an intellectual thaw and de-Staliniza- 
tion in Eastern Europe. He was a forerunner of Gorbachev in that he 
started a process of change, the implications of which he did not under- 
stand and the direction of which he would have deplored. From this 
standpoint, it can be said that the collapse of communism started with 
Khrushchev. 

That collapse was so total that it tempts one to forget how recklessly 
Khrushchev challenged the international community. He had a peasant’s 
instinct for spotting the neuralgic points of the countries his ideology had 
defined as imperialist. He fomented a Middle East crisis, issued a series 
of ultimatums over Berlin, encouraged wars of national liberation, and 
placed missiles in Cuba. But while he caused the West much discomfiture, 
he achieved no permanent gains for the Soviet Union because he was 
better at starting crises than at knowing how to finish them. And because, 
despite all of its confusion, the West did in the end resist, the upshot of 
Khrushchev’s aggressive actions was a vast expenditure of Soviet re- 
sources for no permanent strategic gain and for a severe humiliation 
during the Cuban missile crisis. 

The 1955 Geneva Summit was the point of departure for all these 
adventures. On the way home from Geneva, Khrushchev stopped in East 
Berlin to recognize the sovereignty of the East German communist re- 
gime. It was a move Stalin had avoided. For the remainder of the Cold 
War, the issue of German unification would disappear from the interna- 
tional agenda because Moscow had consigned it to negotiations between 
the two German states. Since the political values of these states were 
incompatible and neither state was prepared to commit suicide, unifica- 
tion could only have come about by the political collapse of one of them. 
Thus, the Berlin crisis of 1958-62 had its origins at Geneva. 

By 1955, a decade after Roosevelt’s death, the postwar settlement in 


520 



Negotiating with the Communists 


Europe was emerging at last, not by negotiation among the victors of the 
Second World War but as a result of their inability to negotiate a settle- 
ment. It was precisely what Roosevelt had tried to avoid: two armed 
camps facing off in the center of the Continent and a massive American 
military commitment to Europe — a spheres-of-influence arrangement in 
every sense of the word. Yet it was an arrangement that provided for a 
certain stability. The German question, if unresolved, had at least been 
put on hold. The Soviets had to accept, if not recognize, the Western 
German state, and the Americans would do the same for East Germany. 

But Nikita Khrushchev was not about to let the American sphere pros- 
per uncontested. He would challenge the West in arenas which Stalin had 
always deemed to be outside the Soviet sphere of interest, causing the 
hot points of Soviet-American competition to move beyond Europe. The 
first of these hot points was to erupt in what came to be known as the 
Suez Crisis of 1956. 


521 



f 


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 

Leapfrogging Containment: 
The Suez Crisis 


All the talk of peaceful coexistence emanating from the 1955 Geneva 
Summit could not alter the fundamental reality: the United States and the 
Soviet Union, far and away the pre-eminent powers in the world, were 
locked in geopolitical competition. A gain for one side was widely per- 
ceived as being a loss for the other. By the mid-1950s, the American 
sphere of influence in Western Europe was thriving, and America’s dem- 
onstrated willingness to protect that sphere with military force deterred 
Soviet adventurism. But stalemate in Europe did not mean stalemate 
around the world. In 1955, just two months after the Geneva Summit, the 
Soviet Union made a major arms sale to Egypt by bartering weapons for 
cotton, then in oversupply — a daring move to extend Soviet influence 
into the Middle East. In making his bid for influence in Egypt, Khrushchev 
had in effect ‘leapfrogged" the cordon sanitaire which the United States 


521 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


had constructed around the Soviet Union, confronting Washington with 
the task of having to counter the Soviets in areas heretofore considered 
to be safely within the Western sphere. 

Stalin had never been willing to stake Soviet credibility on the devel- 
oping world. He considered it too far from home and too unstable, its 
leaders too difficult to control, and the Soviet Union not yet powerful 
enough to engage in distant adventures — though, in time, the growth of 
Soviet military power might well have changed his attitude. As late as 
1947, Andrei Zhdanov, who had appeared to be among Stalin’s closest 
advisers at the time, was still describing the Middle East as an area domi- 
nated by American and British imperialists competing with each other. 1 

The Soviet leaders could not have failed to understand that their first 
sale of arms to a developing country would inflame Arab nationalism, 
make the Arab-Israeli conflict more intractable, and be perceived as a 
major challenge to Western dominance in the Middle East. By the time 
the smoke cleared, the Suez crisis had destroyed the Great Power status 
of both Great Britain and France. Outside of Europe, America would 
henceforth be obliged to man the ramparts of the Cold War essentially 
alone. 

Khrushchevs opening gambit was cautious enough. The Soviet Union 
was not even involved in the initial arms sale, since the transaction was 
technically Czechoslovakian, although that subterfuge was soon aban- 
doned. However camouflaged, the sale of Soviet arms to the Middle East 
pressed on a neuralgic point of Western Europe, especially of Great 
Britain. After India, Egypt represented the most important legacy of Great 
Britain’s imperial past. In the twentieth century, the Suez Canal had be- 
come the principal artery for the supply of oil to Western Europe. Even 
in its weakened state immediately after the Second World War, Great 
Britain continued to regard itself as the pre-eminent power in the Middle 
East, its dominance resting on two pillars: Iran, which supplied oil 
through a joint Anglo-Iranian company; and Egypt, which served as the 
strategic base. The Arab League was promoted by Anthony Eden in 1945 
as the political framework for resisting outside penetration of the Middle 
East. Significant British forces remained in Egypt, Iraq, and Iran. A British 
officer, General John Glubb (Glubb Pasha), commanded Jordan’s Arab 
Legion. 

In the 1950s, this world came unglued. To the applause of the first 
generation of newly independent countries, Iranian Prime Minister Mos- 
sadegh nationalized Iran’s oil industry in 1951 and demanded the with- 
drawal of British troops protecting the oil complex at Abadan. Great 
Britain no longer felt strong enough to undertake military action so close 


523 



Diplomacy 


to the Soviet border without American support, which was not forthcom- 
ing. Moreover, it thought it had a fail-back position in its major base along 
the Suez Canal. 

The challenge posed by Mossadegh ended two years later when the 
United States encouraged a coup to overthrow him. (In those days, Wash- 
ington still considered covert operations more legitimate than military 
intervention.) Great Britain’s pre-eminence in Iran was never restored, 
however. By 1952, Great Britain’s military position in Egypt was crum- 
bling as well. A group of young officers expressing the nationalist and 
anticolonial mood that was sweeping the region deposed the corrupt 
King Farouk. Their dominant figure was Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser. 

A powerful personality possessed of considerable charm, Nasser grew 
into a charismatic figure by appealing to Arab nationalism. He had felt 
deeply humiliated by the Arab defeat in the 1948 war with Israel. He saw 
in the establishment of the Jewish state the culmination of a century of 
Western colonialism. He was determined to expel Great Britain and 
France from the region. 

Nasser’s emergence brought into the open the dormant conflict be- 
tween the United States and its principal NATO allies over the issue of 
colonialism. As early as April 1951, Churchill, then still the leader of the 
Opposition, had called for joint action in the Middle East: 

We are no longer strong enough ourselves to bear the whole political 
burden we have hitherto borne in the Mediterranean, or even to take 
the leading part in the diplomatic control of that theatre. But the United 
States and Britain together, aided by France ... we three together would 
be in a most powerful position to deal with, say, the Egyptian problem 
and the whole question of the defence of the Suez Canal. 2 

When it came to the Middle East, however, America rejected the role it 
had played in Greece and Turkey, and would neither assume the legacy 
of European political pre-eminence nor allow itself to be associated with 
the colonial tradition. Both Truman and Eisenhower adamantly opposed 
British military action in Iran or Egypt on the ostensible ground that 
disputes of this kind should be adjudicated by the United Nations. In 
reality, they did not want to be identified with Great Britain’s colonial 
heritage, which they correctly considered to be untenable. 

Yet America was prone to its own illusions, one of which was that 
the independence movements of the developing world paralleled the 
American experience, and that the new nations would therefore support 
American foreign policy once they realized that the U.S. attitude about 


524 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


colonialism sharply differed from that of the old European powers. But 
the leaders of the independence movements were of a different type than 
America’s Founding Fathers. While using the rhetoric of democracy, they 
lacked the commitment to it of the drafters of the American Constitution, 
who genuinely believed in a system of checks and balances. The vast 
majority of them governed in an authoritarian manner. Many were Marx- 
ists. Almost all of them saw in the East-West conflict an opportunity to 
overturn what they identified as the old imperialist system. However 
much America might dissociate from European colonialism, American 
leaders, to their chagrin, found themselves perceived in developing coun- 
tries as useful auxiliaries from the imperialist camp rather than as genuine 
partners. 

In the end, America was drawn into the Middle East by the containment 
theory, which required opposition to Soviet expansion in every region, 
and by the doctrine of collective security, which encouraged the creation 
of NATO-like organizations to resist actual or potential military threats. 
Yet, for the most part, the nations of the Middle East did not share Amer- 
ica’s strategic views. They thought of Moscow primarily as a useful lever 
to extract concessions from the West rather than as a threat to their 
independence. Many of the new nations managed to convey the impres- 
sion that their takeover by the communists would hold more danger for 
the United States than it did for them, so that there was no need for them 
to pay any price for American protection. Above all, populist rulers like 
Nasser saw no future in being identified with the West. They wanted their 
volatile publics to perceive them as having wrested not only indepen- 
dence but freedom of maneuver from the democracies. Nonalignment 
was for them as much a domestic necessity as a foreign policy choice. 

At first, neither Great Britain nor America fully grasped what Nasser 
represented. Both nations proceeded from the premise that Nasser’s re- 
sistance to their policies was due to some specific set of grievances that 
could be redressed. What little chance existed for testing this hypothesis 
was vitiated by the different premises of the democracies. Great Britain 
sought to induce Nasser to accept its historic dominance, whereas the 
United States tried to lure Nasser into its grand strategy of containment. 
The Soviet Union discerned an opportunity to outflank “capitalist encir- 
clement” and to acquire new allies by supplying them with arms without 
(as in Eastern Europe) having to assume responsibility for their domestic 
governance. Nasser cleverly used the conjunction of all of these impulses 
to pit the various contenders against each other. 

The infusion of Soviet arms into the volatile Middle East accelerated 
this process. Great Britain’s and America’s best riposte would have been 


525 



Diplomacy 


to isolate Nasser until it had become obvious that Soviet arms had gained 
him nothing, and then, if Nasser abandoned his Soviet ties — or, better 
still, if he was replaced by a more moderate leader — to follow up with a 
generous diplomatic initiative. That was to be the American strategy 7 to- 
ward Anwar Sadat twenty years later. In 1955, the democracies chose the 
opposite tactic: they tried hard to conciliate Nasser by meeting many of 
his demands. 

Like mirages in the desert, the hopes of the outside powers evaporated 
as soon as any effort was made to implement them. Great Britain found 
that, no matter how it sugarcoated its military presence in the region, it 
could not make it palatable to the local governments. America’s schizo- 
phrenic policy of dissociating from Great Britain on Middle Eastern issues 
in order to enlist Nasser into a partnership with Great Britain in a global 
anti-Soviet strategy never got off the ground. Nasser had no conceivable 
incentive to abandon his Soviet ties. His incentive turned out to be the 
precise opposite, and he sought to balance every benefit from the United 
States by some move toward either the Soviets or the radical neutrals, 
and preferably both. The more Washington tried to placate Nasser, the 
more the wily Egyptian gravitated toward the Soviets, thereby raising the 
ante and seeking to siphon more benefits out of the United States. 

In due course, the Soviet Union too was to experience the frustrations 
of dealing with the Nonaligned group. In the early stages of Soviet pene- 
tration of the Middle East, all was net gain. At a negligible cost to Moscow, 
the democracies were thrown on the defensive. Their internal conflicts 
mounted while a Soviet presence was forged in areas heretofore con- 
signed to the Western sphere of influence. As time passed, however, the 
Soviets’ passionate Middle Eastern clients involved Moscow in risks which 
were out of proportion to any conceivable Soviet gain. And whenever the 
Soviet Union tried to relate these risks to its own national interest, it 
incurred the displeasure, if not the contempt, of its newfound clients. 
This enabled Western diplomacy to demonstrate the Soviets’ inability to 
fulfill their clients’ goals — culminating in Sadat’s turn away from Moscow 
starting in 1972. 

Great Britain was the first to be forced to abandon its illusions about 
the Middle East. Its military base along the Suez Canal was one of its last 
significant imperial outposts, garrisoned by some 80,000 troops. Yet Great 
Britain was in no position to maintain a large force in the Canal Zone in 
the face of Egyptian opposition and without American support. In 1954, 
pressed by the United States, Great Britain agreed to withdraw forces 
from its Suez base by 1956. 

American leaders were striving to combine two incompatible policies: 


526 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


to end Great Britain’s imperial role exploiting the remnants of British 
influence to build a structure of containment in the Middle East. The 
Eisenhower Administration devised the concept of the Northern Tier of 
nations — to be composed of Turkey, Iraq, Syria, and Pakistan, with Iran 
as a possible participant later on. A Middle Eastern version of NATO, its 
purpose was to contain the Soviet Union along its southern borders. 

This concept came to fruition in the British-sponsored Baghdad Pact, 
but it proved flawed on several counts. For an alliance to be effective, it 
must reflect some sense of common purpose, a perception of common 
danger, and the capacity to pool strengths. None of these elements ap- 
plied to the Baghdad Pact. The divisions and animosities among the na- 
tions in the area were greater than their mutual fear of Soviet expansion. 
Syria refused to join the Pact; Iraq, even while serving as its headquarters 
for two years, was far more concerned about fending off Arab radicalism 
than about Soviet aggressiveness; Pakistan viewed threats to its security as 
coming from India, not the Soviet Union. 

Nor were the military forces of the various members of the Baghdad 
Pact designed to assist neighbors in the event of aggression by a super- 
power; their basic purpose was domestic security. Above all, Nasser, as 
the most dynamic force in the area, was determined to wreck the Pact, 
which he viewed as a devious maneuver to refurbish colonial domination 
of the Middle East and to isolate him and his fellow radicals. 

Too divided to design punitive measures to counter the Soviet influ- 
ence in the region, Great Britain and the United States next tried to coax 
Egypt away from Moscow by demonstrating the advantages of adhering 
to the Western camp. They pursued two policies to this end — promoting 
peace between Egypt and Israel, and helping Nasser to construct the 
Aswan Dam. 

The peace initiative was based on the belief that the establishment of 
the Jewish state by force of arms in 1948 was the principal source of 
Arab radicalism. An honorable peace, it was thought, would remove that 
humiliation. But at that point, Arab radicals and nationalists were not 
seeking peace with Israel, honorable or otherwise. To them, the Jewish 
state was an alien presence injected into traditionally Arab lands on the 
basis of a 2,000-year-old claim and to expiate the Jews’ suffering, which 
the Arab peoples had not caused. 

If Nasser had made a genuine peace with Israel — that is, had settled 
for coexistence — he would have forfeited his claim to leadership of the 
Arab world. Determined not to be embarrassed before his Arab constitu- 
ency, Nasser proposed that Israel give up the entire Negev, the southern 
desert region which it had conquered in 1948 and which constituted well 


527 



Diplomacy 


over half of Israel’s territory, and that the hundreds of thousands of 
Palestinian refugees evicted in 1948 be given the right to return. 3 

Israel would never agree to give up half of its territory or permit a 
repatriation of all Arab refugees, which would have swamped what was 
left of the state. Israel’s way out was to insist on a formal peace agreement 
with open borders — a harmless-sounding request, but also the one de- 
mand Arab leaders found the most difficult to meet because it implied 
their permanent acceptance of the new state. Between Israel’s demand 
for peace without offering territory and the Arab countries’ demand for 
territory without defining peace, deadlock was inevitable. The first negoti- 
ation gave rise to a script that would be adhered to until Sadat’s advent in 
Egypt, and for another twenty years in the rest of the Arab world — until 
the agreement between the PLO and Israel in September 1993. 

By now, the United States and Great Britain were at loggerheads over 
a variety of issues. Though Dulles favored the Northern Tier policy, he 
was annoyed that Great Britain should have assumed its leadership, and 
wanted the Baghdad Pact to be centered on Egypt; which, in turn, fought 
the Pact tooth and nail. Great Britain would have preferred to overthrow 
Nasser; America, however uncomfortable with the Soviet arms deal, 
thought it wiser to propitiate him. 

Anxious to restore their tattered unity, the Anglo-American leaders next 
turned their attention to the vast construction project of the so-called 
Aswan High Dam: 365 feet high and three miles long, it was to be built 
on the Upper Nile, near Egypt’s border with the Sudan. It would regulate 
the irrigation of the Nile Valley, on which the subsistence of the Egyptian 
population had depended since time immemorial, and would free it from 
its annual dependence on the flooding of the Nile. 

Anthony Eden, Nasser’s most implacable foe, had first raised the pros- 
pect of joint Anglo-American support for the High Dam, with America 
bearing the lion’s share (about 90 percent) of the burden. Why Eden, 
who was eager to get rid of Nasser, turned into the Aswan Dam’s principal 
advocate can only be explained by his desire to be perceived as bestriding 
Mideast diplomacy and forestalling any Soviet attempt to follow up mili- 
tary assistance with economic penetration. On December 14, 1955, Great 
Britain and the United States made a formal offer to build the dam in 
two stages: some limited funds were made immediately available for the 
preparatory stage, during which a determination would be made of the 
extent and nature of assistance for the second stage, which involved 
the actual construction of the dam. 4 

It was a strange decision. Two governments were committing them- 
selves to a monumental engineering and financial undertaking even 
though both preferred to see Nasser replaced and were deeply con- 


528 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


cerned about his drift toward the Soviet orbit. The two discordant allies 
consoled themselves with the belief that, even if the original grant did 
not win Nasser over, the second stage would make Egypt financially de- 
pendent on them in much the same way that the building of the Suez 
Canal had given the West financial control over Egypt in the nineteenth 
century. 

Far from moderating Nasser, the Aswan Dam project aroused in him a 
sense of his importance. In order to preserve his bargaining leverage, he 
moved rapidly to undertake a series of compensatory moves. Haggling 
tenaciously over financial terms, he rejected American entreaties to help 
facilitate Arab-Israeli negotiations. When Great Britain tried to persuade 
Jordan to join the Baghdad Pact, pro-Egyptian riots broke out, which 
obliged King Hussein to dismiss Glubb Pasha, the British commander of 
the Arab Legion, in March 1956. 5 

On May 16, Nasser withdrew recognition from the government of 
Chiang Kai-shek, and established diplomatic relations with the People’s 
Republic of China. This was a direct rebuke to the United States but 
especially to Dulles, who was deeply committed to Taiwan. In June, the 
new Soviet Foreign Minister, Dmitri Shepilov, came to Egypt with a Soviet 
offer to both finance and build the Aswan Dam, enabling Nasser to engage 
in his favorite pastime of playing the superpowers off against each other. 

On July 19, Dulles decided to put an end to the charade. The Egyptian 
leader’s recognition of Communist China had been the final straw that 
convinced Dulles to teach him a lesson. When the Egyptian Ambassador 
returned from Cairo with instructions to accept all American technical 
proposals, Dulles replied that Washington had come to the conclusion 
that the dam was beyond Egypt’s economic capabilities. No aid would be 
forthcoming. 

Dulles had thought himself quite prepared for a strong Egyptian re- 
sponse. He told Henry Luce, publisher of Time , that the Aswan Dam 
decision was “as big a chess move as US diplomacy has made in a long 
time.” Nasser, he argued, was “in a hell of a spot and no matter what he 
does, can be used to American advantage. If he turns to the Russians now 
and they say ‘No,’ this will undermine the whole fabric of recent Soviet 
economic carpet-bagging all over the world. ... If the Soviets agree to 
give Nasser his dam, then we are working up plans to lay it on thick in 
the satellite countries as to why their living conditions are so miserable 
with the Soviets dishing out millions to Egypt.” 6 What was conspicuously 
lacking in Dulles’ observation was a willingness to back up a “big move” 
with a readiness to run big risks. It was but another example of Dulles’ 
congenital tendency to overestimate the role of propaganda, especially 
behind the Iron Curtain. 


529 



Diplomacy 


However flimsy the political rationale for the dam had been in the first 
place, the manner in which the American offer of aid was withdrawn 
courted a major crisis. The French Ambassador to Washington, Maurice 
Couve de Murville (who would later become de Gaulle’s Foreign Minis- 
ter), accurately predicted what was about to happen: “They will do some- 
thing about Suez. That’s the only way they can touch the Western 
countries.” 7 

Before a vast crowd in Alexandria on July 26, 1956, Nasser gave his 
answer to Dulles, couching his riposte in an appeal to Arab nationalism: 

This, O citizens, is the battle in which we are now involved. It is a battle 
against imperialism and the methods and tactics of imperialism, and a 
battle against Israel, the vanguard of imperialism — 

Arab nationalism progresses. Arab nationalism triumphs. Arab nation- 
alism marches forward; it knows its road and it knows its strength. Arab 
nationalism knows who are its enemies and who are its friends — 8 

Deliberately challenging France, he told the crowd: “We can never say 
that the battle of Algeria is not our battle.” In the middle of his speech, 
Nasser pronounced the name of Ferdinand de Lesseps, the Frenchman 
who had built the Suez Canal. It was the code word for Egyptian military 
forces to seize control of the Canal. This enabled Nasser, near the end of 
his delivery, to announce to the frenzied multitude: “At this moment as I 
talk to you some of your Egyptian brethren . . . have started to take over 
the canal company and its property and to control shipping in the canal 
— the canal which is situated in Egyptian territory, which ... is part of 
Egypt and which is owned by Egypt.” 9 

The differences in perspective among the democracies which had char- 
acterized the prelude to the Suez crisis now blighted their reaction to it. 
Eden, who had risen to the position of Prime Minister the year before, 
after too long a wait, was temperamentally unsuited to make decisions 
under pressure. Being Churchill’s immediate successor would have 
proved enough of a burden, but it was compounded by Eden’s having 
acquired a reputation for strength that was entirely at variance with his 
psychological and, indeed, physical frailties. Only a few months earlier, 
he had undergone a major operation, and was in constant need of medi- 
cation. Most of all, Eden was the captive of his formative years. A fluent 
Arabist, he had grown up in the period of British domination of the 
Middle East, and was determined to stop Nasser, single-handedly if neces- 
sary. 

France was even more hostile to Nasser. Its major interests in the Arab 


530 



Leapfrogging Containment. The Suez Crisis 


world were in Morocco and Algeria, the former a French protectorate, 
the latter a department of Metropolitan France containing a million 
Frenchmen. Both North African countries were in the process of seeking 
independence, for which Nasser’s policies provided emotional and politi- 
cal support. The Soviet arms deal raised the prospect that Egypt would 
become a conduit for Soviet arms to the Algerian guerrillas as well. “All 
this [is] in the works of Nasser, just as Hitler’s policy [was] written down 
in Mein Kampf *” declared Frances new Prime Minister, Guy Mollet. “Nas- 
ser [has] the ambition to recreate the conquests of Islam .” 10 

The analogy to Hitler was not really on the mark. Implying that Nasser’s 
Egypt was determined to conquer foreign nations, it ascribed a validity 
to Middle Eastern borders that the Arab nationalists did not recognize. 
The borders in Europe — except for those in the Balkans — reflected in 
the main a common history and culture. By contrast, the borders of the 
Middle East had been drawn by foreign, largely European, powers at 
the end of the First World War in order to facilitate their domination of 
the area. In the minds of Arab nationalists, these frontiers cut across the 
Arab nation and denied a common Arab culture. Erasing them was not a 
way for one country to dominate another; it was the way to create an Arab 
nation, much as Cavour had built Italy, and Bismarck had created Ger- 
many out of a plethora of sovereign states. 

However inexact their analogy, once Eden and Mollet had nailed their 
flag to the anti-appeasement mast, it should have become clear that they 
would not retreat. They belonged to the generation, after all, that viewed 
appeasement as a cardinal sin, and Munich as a permanent reproach. 
Comparing a leader to Hitler or even to Mussolini meant that they 
had moved beyond the possibility of compromise. They would either 
have to prevail or lose all claim to governance — most of all in their own 
eyes. 

The reaction of Eden and Mollet to the nationalization of the Suez 
Canal was violent. Eden cabled Eisenhower the day after Nasser’s speech: 
“If we do not [take a firm stand], our influence and yours throughout 
the Middle East will, we are convinced, be finally destroyed .” 11 Three 
days later, in the House of Commons, he cut off any possibility of re- 
treat: 

No arrangements for the future of this great international waterway 
could be acceptable to Her Majesty’s Government which would leave 
it in the unfettered control of a single Power which could, as re- 
cent events have shown, exploit it purely for purposes of national 
policy . 12 


531 



Diplomacy 


France was no less firm. On July 29, the French Ambassador to London 
informed the British Foreign Secretary that France was prepared to put 
its forces under British command and to pull troops out of Algeria for 
joint action against Egypt. 13 

When Dulles appeared in London on August 1 for consultations, he 
seemed to share these views. Proclaiming that it was not acceptable for 
any one nation to control the Canal, especially if that nation was Egypt, 
he insisted that: 

A way had to be found to make Nasser disgorge what he was attempting 
to swallow. . . . We must make a genuine effort to bring world opinion 
to favour the international operation of the canal. ... It should be possi- 
ble to create a world opinion so adverse to Nasser that he would be 
isolated. Then if a military operation had to be undertaken it would be 
more apt to succeed and have less grave repercussions than if it had 
been undertaken precipitately. 14 

He proposed that a Maritime Conference composed of twenty-four of the 
principal maritime nations meet in London in another fortnight to devise 
an international system of free navigation through the Canal. 

Dulles’ call for a conference was the beginning of a puzzling and, for 
Great Britain and France, maddening, and ultimately humiliating process. 
Even Dulles’ opening shot was an effort to couple tough language with a 
time-wasting diplomacy. In no time at all, it became apparent that the 
allies were not of one mind about the crisis. Eden and Mollet saw the 
overthrow or humiliation of Nasser as an end in itself, whereas Eisen- 
hower and Dulles looked at die crisis in terms of long-range relations 
with the Arab world. Both sides operated from flawed preconceptions: 
Eden and Mollet acted as if the end of Nasser would restore the situation 
which had existed prior to his accession to power; Eisenhower and Dulles 
seemed to believe that, if not Nasser, then some other nationalist leader 
in the region might yet be induced into a NATO-like Middle East security 
system. It was also their view that military action against Nasser would so 
inflame Arab nationalism that Western influence would be ruined for a 
generation— a far darker scenario than losing control over the Canal. 

Neither assumption proved correct. Pre-Nasser Egypt was gone forever. 
The other nationalist leaders who had modeled themselves after Nasser 
were immune to the siren songs of containment. Their main bargaining 
chip was the Cold War itself, which they exploited to the same degree 
that they condemned it. And the real issue was what would inflame Arab 
nationalism more — Nasser’s victory or his defeat. 


532 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


From a strictly analytical point of view, America ought to have shared 
the British and French perception that Nasser’s brand of militant national- 
ism represented an insuperable obstacle to a constructive Middle East 
policy. A demonstration that reliance on Soviet arms served no positive 
purpose might have obviated decades of upheaval in the developing 
world. From that point of view, it would have been desirable to face 
down Nasser. But, having accomplished his defeat, the United States could 
not participate in a restoration of British and French colonial dominance. 
Where America should have separated from its allies — if it were abso- 
lutely necessary — was not at the beginning of the Suez Crisis, but upon 
its successful conclusion. A demonstration that reliance on Soviet support 
was disastrous for Egypt should have been followed by support for the 
reasonable nationalistic aims of a moderate successor to Nasser — much 
as America reacted to Sadat in the 1970s. 

The democracies, however, were not ready for so complicated a strat- 
egy. Great Britain and France did not accept that the precondition for 
overthrowing Nasser was their being prepared to grant many of his de- 
mands to a more moderate successor. America did not understand how 
important it was for its policy that two close NATO allies be permitted to 
adjust to the new circumstances without undermining their image of 
themselves as Great Powers. For once a nation’s image of itself is de- 
stroyed, so is its willingness to play a major international role. This was 
why Harold Macmillan, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, told Ambassa- 
dor Robert Murphy, a Dulles emissary, that, if Great Britain did not con- 
front Nasser now, “Britain would become another Netherlands.” 15 
Americas leaders, however, opted for a chance to win over the radical 
nationalists, first by dissociating themselves from Great Britain and France 
diplomatically, later by publicly opposing them and demonstrating the 
limits of their capacity to shape Middle East events — in other words, 
bringing home to them the end of their roles as Great Powers. 

Treating the Canal regime as a legal issue, Dulles focused on the poten- 
tial disruption of the sea-lanes and was fertile in coming up with legal 
formulae to get around possible obstacles to free transit through the 
Canal. Eden and Mollet, however, were determined not to accept nation- 
alization of the Suez Canal; they tried to turn it into a pretext for bringing 
down Nasser or, at a minimum, for humiliating him. Nasser finally played 
for time, as revolutionaries often do after a fait accompli. The longer 
their action stands, the more difficult it becomes to reverse it — especially 
by using force. 

Eisenhower was passionate in his opposition to the use of force, even 
for the purpose of upholding the principle of free passage through the 


533 



Diplomacy 


Suez Canal, which Dulles had publicly supported in London. Dulles had 
brought with him a letter from the President to Eden stressing the “unwis- 
dom even of contemplating the use of military force at this moment — ” 
Eisenhower went so far as to imply that unilateral British action would 
risk Americas willingness to sustain NATO and, by implication, might 
leave America’s allies at the mercy of Moscow. If war broke out, the letter 
read, before Great Britain had clearly demonstrated that it had exhausted 
every peaceful means of settling the crisis, it “could very seriously affect 
our peoples’ feelings towards our Western allies. I do not want to exag- 
gerate, but I could assure you that this could grow to such an intensity as 
to have the most far-reaching consequences.” 16 

On the face of it, no two countries seemed less likely to clash than 
Great Britain and the United States, led by men who shared so many 
wartime experiences. Eden could not believe that Eisenhower might 
transform his misgivings about unilateral British and French actions into 
open opposition. And Eisenhower was convinced that, at the end of the 
day, France and Great Britain would not dare to act without America’s 
support. British and American leaders prized their “special relationship,” 
which was reinforced by wartime partnership and personal friendship. 
But during the Suez Crisis, they were thwarted by a fundamental clash of 
personalities. The British leaders found Dulles a prickly interlocutor, and 
Eden came to regard him with distaste. 

By family tradition and personal avocation, John Foster Dulles seemed 
exceptionally well-suited for the office of Secretary of State. His grandfa- 
ther, John Foster, had served as Secretary of State under President Benja- 
min Harrison; his uncle, Robert Lansing, had been Wilson’s Secretary of 
State at the Versailles Peace Conference. Although John Foster Dulles had 
been a corporate lawyer until well into his middle age, his enduring 
preoccupation was with foreign policy. 

American secretaries of state have traditionally affirmed America’s ex- 
ceptionalism and the universal validity of its values. Dulles was no differ- 
ent except that his form of exceptionalism was religious rather than 
philosophical. His first experience with international affairs had been as 
head of a Protestant commission engaged in promoting world peace. He 
once stated proudly, “Nobody in the Department of State knows as much 
about the Bible as I do.” 17 And he sought to apply the principles of his 
stern Presbyterian faith to the conduct of day-to-day American foreign 
policy. “I am convinced,” he wrote in 1950, “that we here need to make 
our political thoughts and practices reflect more faithfully a religious faith 
that man has his origin and destiny in God.” 18 Though Dulles represented 
a classic American phenomenon which Gladstone’s generation of En- 
glishmen would have easily recognized, the postwar generation of British 


534 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


leaders resented his righteousness and thought him duplicitous rather 
than spiritual. 

Unfortunately, Dulles’ tendency to deliver sermons to his interlocutors 
too often overshadowed his superb knowledge of foreign affairs and, in 
particular, his thoughtful analysis of the dynamics of the Soviet system. 
Churchill described Dulles as “a dour Puritan, a great white bespectacled 
face with a smudge of a mouth,” and, in lighter moments, occasionally 
referred to him as “Dullith.” Eden had little confidence in Dulles from 
the very beginning. In 1952, before Eisenhower had appointed Dulles as 
Secretary of State, Eden voiced his hope for some other counterpart; “I 
do not think I would be able to work with him.” 19 

Dulles had many qualities which made him vastly influential. His work 
ethic and devotion to principle had impressed Eisenhower. Konrad Ade- 
nauer regarded Dulles as “the greatest man” he had ever known, and one 
who “kept his word.” 20 Dulles’ rigid conception of a bipolar world, his 
wariness of letting himself be cajoled or pressured into concessions to 
Moscow, and his dour resolve endeared him to Adenauer and other 
leaders who feared a separate Soviet-American bargain. 

In London, however, Dulles’ invocations of a higher morality accentu- 
ated the increasingly incompatible perspectives of London and Washing- 
ton. Throughout, Dulles vociferously supported the stated objectives of 
Great Britain and France while just as consistently resisting the use of 
force to vindicate them. He was extraordinarily creative about coming up 
with ideas to overcome the crisis, but, on closer examination, these dis- 
solved into a time-consuming stalling action to blunt the Anglo-French 
rush to war. Had Dulles been prepared to insist on his own proposals, 
they might well have served as a practical solution to the Suez crisis — 
perhaps not the preferred outcome for Great Britain and France, but one 
they could have lived with. 

Yet Dulles had barely returned to the United States before he dis- 
avowed the use of force, even if his own proposals to the Maritime 
Conference were rejected by Nasser. On August 3, he said: 

We do not . . . want to meet violence with violence. We want, first of all, 
to find out the opinion of the many nations vitally interested because 
we believe that all the nations concerned, including Egypt, will respect 
the sober opinion of the nations which are parties to the international- 
izing treaty of 1888, or by its terms, entitled to its benefits. 21 

Moralistic rhetoric would not alter the reality that Dulles’ refusal to con- 
sider force was pointing allied diplomacy toward a dead end. The only 
way to induce Nasser to accept Dulles’ proposed Canal regime was by 


535 



Diplomacy 


threatening him with British and French military intervention if he re- 
fused Yet Dulles balanced each of his schemes for international control 
of the Canal with some statement emphatically abjuring the use offeree, 
which practically invited Nasser to reject them. 

Dulles had joined Great Britain and France in calling for a conference 
of the twenty-four principal users of the Suez Canal, including the eight 
countries that had signed the Constantinople Convention of 1888 estab- 
lishing the regime Nasser was attempting to abrogate. The United States 
voted with the majority of eighteen nations to propose a new Canal 
regime, which accepted Egyptian sovereignty and participation by Egyp- 
tian personnel, but also established the Conference participants as de 
facto administrators of the Canal. However fertile in coming up with 
expedients, Dulles proved unwilling to employ sanctions other than pub- 
lic opinion to implement them. Denying that there was any inconsistency 
between his proposals and what he seemed to be prepared to do about 
them, Dulles insisted that, in the end, moral persuasion would convince 
Nasser to yield. In his view, most people: 

. . . pay decent respect for the opinions of mankind And because 1 

believe that, I am confident that out of this conference there will come 
a judgment of such moral force that we can be confident that the Suez 
Canal will go on, as it has for the last 100 years, for the years in the 
future to serve in peace the interests of mankind. 22 

As it happened, moral pressure proved insufficient in precisely the same 
proportion to which physical force had been ruled out. On September 
10, Nasser rejected the proposals of the London Maritime Conference. 

Three days later, Dulles came up with another ingenious proposal. This 
time he proposed a Users’ Association to operate the Canal and to collect 
dues by a kind of picket line of ships off the ports of Port Said and Suez, 
at either end of the Canal just outside of Egypt’s territorial waters. If 
Nasser did not yield, the Users’ Association would go ahead without him; 
if he went along, he would abdicate control over Canal revenues to an 
international body. The intricate scheme might well have worked had not 
Dulles, as he did with the Maritime Conference, undercut his own pro- 
posal. At a press conference on October 2, Dulles once again disavowed 
the use of force. He used the occasion as well to lecture Eden on the 
inappropriateness of the proposition that NATO should deal with Suez- 
type crises: 

There is some difference in the approaches to the Suez Canal problem. 
That difference relates perhaps to some rather fundamental things. In 


536 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


some areas the three nations are bound together by treaties, such as 
the Atlantic pact area In those the three . . . stand together. 

Other problems relate to other areas and touch the so-called prob- 
lem of colonialism in some way or other. On these problems the United 
States plays a somewhat independent role . 23 

Dulles’ legal interpretation was valid enough, though, in the future, the 
shoe would turn out to be on the other foot. For America’s allies would 
invoke the same argument when America needed their support in Viet- 
nam and in other so-called “out of area” scenarios. Thus during the 1973 
Middle East War, the European allies refused to permit the American 
airlift to Israel to overfly their territories, reversing the Suez script. Hence- 
forth, it would be America’s allies which would refuse to apply NATO 
obligations outside the strictly defined treaty area. What infuriated Great 
Britain and France in 1956 was not so much the legal interpretation as 
Dulles’ strong implication that, in the Middle East, the United States de- 
fined its vital interests substantially differently from the way its European 
allies did. 

This proved especially galling to London, because, only the day before 
Dulles’ press conference, Eden had cabled Eisenhower that the issue was 
no longer Nasser but the Soviet Union: 

There is no doubt in our minds that Nasser, whether he likes it or not, 
is now effectively in Russian hands, just as Mussolini was in Hitler’s. It 
would be as ineffective to show weakness to Nasser now in order to 
placate him as it was to show weakness to Mussolini . 24 

To Eden, Dulles’ statement meant that the United States did not accept 
his proposition that the ultimate threat to Egypt came from the Soviet 
Union. He had wanted to frame the Egyptian issue in terms of the contain- 
ment policy, whereas Dulles seemed to be writing off the whole affair as 
a colonial imbroglio which the United States, determined to preserve its 
image of moral purity, would not touch. 

It is difficult to believe that Dulles was unaware of how dangerous a 
game he was playing. Though he acted as if he believed that the American 
public would respond best to lofty, self-righteous, and moralistic pro- 
nouncements, Dulles also had vast practical experience. He has left no 
explanation for his actions during the Suez crisis. It is plausible, however, 
that he was torn by two contradictory impulses. Given his attitude toward 
communism, he in all likelihood concurred with Eden and Mollet’s analy- 
sis of the dangers of Soviet penetration of the Middle East. This would 


537 



Diplomacy 


explain why his interpretation of Nasser’s motives was indistinguishable 
from Eden’s, and why the abruptness of his rejection of the Aswan Dam 
took even the British Cabinet (which had had a general warning) by 
surprise. 

At the same time, Dulles was Secretary of State to a President who was 
passionately opposed to war in the way only an experienced military man 
can be. Eisenhower was not interested in the nuances of the balance of 
power; even if a long-range danger to the global equilibrium did exist in 
the Middle East, he concluded that America was strong enough to resist 
later on, and well before its actual survival was at stake. To Eisenhower, 
the Suez crisis was not sufficiently threatening to merit the use of force. 
His friendly grin notwithstanding, he had a very strong personality and a 
not very pleasant one when crossed. 

As Dean Acheson once said, the effectiveness of a secretary of state 
depends on knowing who the president is. Dulles certainly knew, but 
Eden and Mollet, who believed Eisenhower to be an amiable figurehead, 
did not. They chose to ignore the implications of a letter Eisenhower had 
written to Eden on September 2 about the Maritime Conference, in which 
he warned once more against the use offeree: 

... the peoples of the Near East and of North Africa and, to some extent, 
of all of Asia and all of Africa, would be consolidated against the West 
to a degree which, I fear, could not be overcome in a generation and, 
perhaps, not even in a century particularly having in mind the capacity 
of the Russians to make mischief. 25 

Dulles was caught between an adamant Eisenhower and an outraged 
group of European allies. Eden and Mollet were beyond the point of 
retreat, and were infuriated by the incongruity between the toughness of 
Dulles’ stated objectives and his repeated disavowal of the practical means 
for achieving them. They never understood how strongly Eisenhower was 
opposed to the use offeree, or how dominant his views were. For Dulles, 
the gap between his allies and Nasser was less of a problem than the one 
between his President and the President’s personal friends in Europe. He 
gambled on closing that gap with his dexterity, hoping that time might 
alter either their position or Eisenhower’s, or lead Nasser into making 
some mistake that would solve everyone’s dilemma. Instead, Dulles 
caused France and Great Britain to risk everything in a desperate throw 
of the dice. 

The dilemma of Dulles’ tactics was summed up in a journalist’s ques- 
tion at a press conference on September 13: “Mr. Secretary, with the 


538 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


United States announcing in advance it will not use force, and with Soviet 
Russia backing Egypt with its propaganda, does that not leave all the 
trump cards in Mr. Nassers hands?” 26 Though Dulles replied vaguely that 
moral force would prevail, the question was right on the mark. 

The growing rift among the democracies encouraged the Kremlin to 
raise the stakes. Stunning Washington, it replaced Western aid to the 
Aswan Dam with its own, and stepped up arms shipments to the Middle 
East. A boisterous Khrushchev told the Yugoslav Ambassador: “Don’t for- 
get that, if a war starts, all our support will be with Egypt. If my son were 
to come to me to volunteer to fight for Egypt, I would encourage him to 
go.” 27 

After Dulles’ October 2 press conference abjuring the use of force a 
second time, a desperate Great Britain and France decided to go ahead 
on their own. British and French military intervention was now only a 
few tactical moves away. One of these was a final appeal to the United 
Nations, which had played a curious role throughout the whole affair. At 
first, Great Britain and France had sought, with American backing, to 
avoid the United Nations altogether, fearing the Nonaligned group’s soli- 
darity with Egypt. As they edged closer to the end of their diplomatic 
tether, however, France and Great Britain did appeal to the United Na- 
tions as a sort of last perfunctory gesture to demonstrate that, because of 
the world organization’s futility, they had no other choice than to act 
alone. The United Nations was thus transformed from a vehicle for solving 
international disputes to a final hurdle to be cleared before resorting to 
force, and, in a sense, even as an excuse for it. 

Unexpectedly and for a brief moment, the United Nations rose to the 
occasion. Private consultations among the Egyptian, British, and French 
foreign ministers produced agreement on six principles which were very 
close to the majority view of the Maritime Conference. An Egyptian op- 
erating board and a supervisory Board of Users were established. Dis- 
putes between the two boards were to be settled by arbitration. 
Eisenhower was elated as he spoke before a television audience on Octo- 
ber 12: 


I have an announcement. I have got the best announcement that I think 
I could possibly make to America tonight. 

The progress made in the settlement of the Suez dispute this after- 
noon at the United Nations is most gratifying. Egypt, Britain and France 
have met, through their foreign ministers, and agreed on a set of princi- 
ples on which to negotiate; and it looks like here is a very great crisis 
that is behind us. 28 


539 



Diplomacy 


Though Eisenhower had not exactly said, “Peace is at hand,” the celebra- 
tions his statement evoked turned out to be premature. The very next 
night, on October 13, the Security Council was asked to endorse the Six 
Principles and encountered an unpleasant surprise. In two separate votes, 
the Principles were unanimously approved but their implementing mea- 
sures were vetoed by the Soviet Union. 

The Six Principles had been the last chance to settle the crisis peace- 
fully. American pressure on Egypt might have induced it to ask the Soviet 
Union to withdraw its veto — assuming that veto had not arisen from the 
collusion of these two countries in the first place. Then too, American 
pressure on the Soviet Union in the form of a warning that, in a show- 
down, the United States would stand with its allies, might have kept the 
Soviets from casting the veto. But the United States was determined to 
maintain the friendship of its allies and to keep open its option toward 
the Nonaligned group. America’s attempt to straddle incompatible poli- 
cies made war inevitable. 

Eden and Mollet had gone along with every formula for avoiding war: 
the Maritime Conference, the Users’ Association, and now the Six Princi- 
ples. In each case, a promising beginning had run aground; in no case 
had America used its diplomatic influence on behalf of proposals Dulles 
had either devised or endorsed. But even though Great Britain and 
France had many understandable reasons to go to war, they imposed a 
fatal burden on themselves by using a ridiculously obvious stratagem as 
a pretext. Concocted by France, the ploy required that Israel invade Egypt 
and advance toward the Suez Canal, whereupon Great Britain and France 
would demand, in the name of freedom of navigation, that both Egypt 
and Israel withdraw to a distance often miles from the Canal. In the event 
of Egypt’s refusal, which was fully expected, Great Britain and France 
would occupy the Canal Zone. What was to be done afterward remained 
vague. The plan would be triggered a week before the American presi- 
dential election. 

Everybody lost by this convoluted scheme. For one thing, it was totally 
inconsistent with the diplomacy in train since Nasser’s seizure of the Suez 
Canal, which had been geared to establishing some sort of international 
regimen over the operation of the Canal. Since the various internationally 
endorsed schemes to guarantee free navigation had aborted, the logical 
next step would have been for Great Britain and France to impose one of 
them by force. Though their unilateral action would no doubt have been 
widely opposed, it would at least have been comprehensible in light 
of the preceding diplomacy. By contrast, the actual French and British 
maneuver was too transparent and too cynical. 


540 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


Each of the partners would have been better off pursuing its objectives 
independently. Great Britain and France undermined their claim to be 
major powers by seeming to need Israels help to take on Egypt. Israel 
lost the moral advantage of its neighbors refusal to discuss peace by 
allowing itself to appear as a tool of colonialism. Great Britain’s position 
in Jordan and Iraq, its key Middle East bastions, was weakened. Eisen- 
hower was deeply offended by a maneuver so seemingly geared to his 
presumed reluctance to antagonize Jewish voters in the last week of an 
election campaign . 29 It takes perseverance to find a policy which com- 
bines the disadvantages of every course of action, or to construct a coali- 
tion that weakens every partner simultaneously. Great Britain, France, and 
Israel managed just that feat. 

Seemingly oblivious to the international outrage awaiting them, Great 
Britain and France compounded their political problems by adopting a 
military strategy so deliberate as to give the appearance of procrastina- 
tion. On October 29 , Israel invaded the Sinai. On October 30 , Great 
Britain and France demanded that both sides withdraw from the Canal, 
which Israeli troops had not yet reached On October 31 , Great Britain 
and France announced that they would intervene on the ground. Yet 
British and French troops did not land in Egypt for another four days, 
and never fulfilled their mission to seize the Canal in the few days they 
were on the ground. 

What no one had counted on was America’s aroused sense of righteous- 
ness. On October 30 , twenty-four hours after Israel’s initial attack, the 
United States submitted a tough resolution in the Security Council 
ordering Israeli armed forces “immediately to withdraw . . . behind the 
established armistice lines .” 30 No demand was made to condemn Egyp- 
tian-sponsored terrorism or the illegal Arab blockade of the Gulf of 
Aqaba. When Great Britain and France entered the conflict on October 
31 , Eisenhower turned on them as well in a television address on the 
same day: 

As it is the manifest right of any of these nations to take such decisions 
and actions, it is likewise our right — if our judgment so dictates — to 
dissent. We believe these actions to have been taken in error. For we 
do not accept the use of force as a wise and proper instrument for the 
settlement of international disputes . 31 

So absolute a renunciation of force was not a principle the Eisenhower 
Administration had ever applied to itself — for example, when it arranged 
the overthrow of the Guatemalan government two years earlier. Nor was 
it followed two years later, when Eisenhower ordered American troops 


541 



Diplomacy 


into Lebanon. This was the first and only time that the United States was 
to vote with the Soviet Union against its closest allies. Eisenhower told 
the American people that, in view of the expected British and French veto 
in the Security Council, he would take his case to the General Assembly, 
where their veto would not apply. 

On November 2, the General Assembly demanded an end to the hostili- 
ties by an overwhelming vote of sixty-four to five. At an overnight session 
on November 3-4, it passed an even stronger resolution and began to 
discuss a United Nations peacekeeping force for the Canal — a token move 
to facilitate British and French withdrawal, since United Nations forces 
are never kept on the soil of a sovereign country against its wishes, and 
Nasser was certain to demand their removal. 

By November 5, a United Nations peacekeeping force was established. 
That same day, Great Britain and France announced that their troops 
would withdraw as soon as the United Nations force was in place— 
perhaps with the arriere pensee that their forces could be part of the 
United Nations contingent. Adding to the poignancy of America’s collu- 
sion in the humiliation of its closest allies, Soviet forces crushed Hungar- 
ian freedom fighters that very day, in the face of what can only, and with 
excessive charity, be described as token United Nations opposition. 

On the night of November 5, a week after the British and French 
ultimatum and twenty-four hours after Soviet tanks had begun to crush 
the Hungarian uprising, the Soviet Union was heard from. The obvious 
split between America and its allies enabled Moscow to pose as Egypt’s 
protector at minimal risk, unleashing a veritable blizzard of communica- 
tions. Foreign Minister Shepilov wrote to the President of the Security 
Council; Prime Minister Bulganin addressed himself to Eden, Mollet, Ei- 
senhower, and David Ben-Gurion, the Israeli Prime Minister. The theme 
in all five messages was the same: “predatory” aggression against Egypt 
must cease; the United Nations needed to organize a joint effort to that 
end; the Soviet Union would cooperate by making its naval and air forces 
available. 

As if all these pronouncements were not menacing enough, Bulganin’s 
letter contained warnings that were tailored to each of the separate ad- 
dressees. Eden, for instance, was vouchsafed the first explicit Soviet threat 
of rocket attacks against a Western ally, albeit in the guise of this rhetorical 
question: 

In what situation would Britain find herself if she were attacked by 

stronger states, possessing all types of modern destructive weapons? 

And such countries could, at the present time, refrain from sending 


542 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


naval or air forces to the shores of Britain and use other means — for 

instance, rocket weapons . 32 

Lest the query be misunderstood, Bulganin inserted one more menacing 
sentence: “We are fully determined to crush the aggressors by the use of 
force and to restore peace in the East.” 33 Similar warnings were issued to 
Mollet. Though less specific, the letter to Ben-Gurion was even more 
threatening, because it stressed that Israeli actions were putting “in jeop- 
ardy the very existence of Israel as a state.” 34 

Finally, in his letter to Eisenhower, Bulganin proposed joint Soviet- 
American military action to put an end to the hostilities in the Middle 
East. He went so far as to hint at a third world war: “If this war is not 
curbed, it is fraught with the danger of, and can develop into, a third 
world war.” 35 Coming from the only other country in a position to start 
such a war, this was ominous indeed. 

The Soviet threats featured that extraordinary bravado which was to 
become the distinguishing feature of Khrushchev’s diplomacy. At the pre- 
cise moment that Soviet troops were brutally suppressing freedom fight- 
ers in Hungary, the Soviet Union had the temerity to bemoan the fate of 
alleged victims of Western imperialism. Only a reckless nature could have 
permitted Khrushchev to voice the threat of a third world war in 1956, 
when the Soviet Union was incomparably weaker than the United States, 
especially in the nuclear field. The Soviet Union was not only in no 
position for a showdown but, as it became imminent, Khrushchev would 
have been obliged to retreat as ignominiously as he in fact did six years 
later over the Cuban missile crisis. 

Eisenhower indignantly rejected joint military action with the Soviet 
Union and warned that the United States would resist any unilateral Soviet 
military move. At the same time, the Soviet warning intensified Washing- 
ton’s pressure on Great Britain and France. On November 6, a run on 
the pound sterling took on alarming proportions. Contrary to previous 
practice, America stood at the sidelines and refused to step in and calm 
the market. 

Battered in the House of Commons, finding little support in the Com- 
monwealth, and utterly abandoned by the United States, Eden threw in 
the towel. On November 6, he agreed to a ceasefire starting the next day. 
British and French forces had been on the ground for less than forty- 
eight hours. 

The British and French expedition had been ham-handedly conceived 
and amateurishly implemented; designed in frustration, and lacking a 
clear-cut political objective, it doomed itself to failure. The United States 


543 



Diplomacy 


could never have supported so flawed an enterprise. Yet the gnawing 
question remains whether America’s dissociation from its allies needed 
to be quite so brutal. Did the United States really have no other choice 
than either to support the French and British adventure or to oppose it 
outright? Legally, the United States had no obligations toward Great Brit- 
ain and France beyond the clearly defined NATO area. But the issue was 
not strictly legal. Was the United States’ national interest really served 
by bringing home in so ruthless a fashion to two of America’s most 
indispensable allies that they had lost all capacity for autonomous 
action? 

The United States was under no obligation to push United Nations 
deliberations at the extraordinarily rapid pace that it did, or to support 
resolutions which ignored the sources of the provocation and focused 
entirely on the immediate issues. The United States could have called 
attention to all the various international schemes to insulate the operation 
of the Canal, to the illegal Arab blockade of the Gulf of Aqaba, or to 
Nasser’s encouragement of terrorist raids against Israel. Above all, it 
could, and should, have linked its condemnation of British and French 
actions with condemnation of Soviet actions in Hungary. By acting as if 
the Suez issue were entirely moral and legal, and as if it had no geopoliti- 
cal basis, the United States evaded the reality that an unconditional victory 
for Nasser — an outcome in which Egypt gave no guarantees with respect 
to the operation of the Canal — was also a victory for a radical policy 
encouraged by Soviet arms and sustained by Soviet threats. 

The heart of the problem was conceptual. America’s leaders put for- 
ward three principles during the Suez crisis, each of which reflected 
long-standing verities: that America’s obligations toward its allies were 
circumscribed by precise legal documents; that recourse to force by any 
nation was inadmissible except when narrowly defined as self-defense; 
and, most important, that the Suez crisis had provided America with an 
opportunity to pursue its true vocation, which was leadership of the 
developing world. 

The first point was made in Eisenhower’s address of October 31, in 
which he threw America’s full diplomatic weight against Great Britain and 
France: “There can be no peace — without law. And there can be no law 
— if we were to invoke one code of international conduct for those who 
oppose us — and another for our friends.” 36 The notion that international 
relations could be exhaustively defined by international law had roots 
deep within American history. The assumption that America should act as 
the impartial moral arbiter of the behavior of nations, unaffected by na- 
tional interest or geopolitics or alliances, is part of that nostalgia. In the 


544 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


real world, however, diplomacy involves, at least in part, the ability to 
discriminate among cases and to distinguish friends from opponents. 

The strict constructionist view that the sole legitimate cause for war is 
self-defense was put forward in December 1956 by John Foster Dulles, 
who interpreted Article 1 of the NATO treaty as creating that obligation: 

... the point was that we considered that such an attack under the 
circumstances would violate the charter of the United Nations, and 
would violate article 1 of the North Atlantic Treaty itself, which requires 
all the parties to that treaty to renounce the use of force, and to settle 
their disputes by peaceful means. That is our complaint: that the treaty 
was violated; not that there was not consultation. 37 

Nobody had ever interpreted Article 1 of the North Atlantic Treaty in so 
pacifist a way; no one would do so again. The idea that the charter of a 
military alliance contained a binding obligation for the peaceful resolu- 
tion of all disputes was surely mind-boggling. In any event, the real issue 
was not legal, but whether an alliance does not include the tacit obligation 
to show some understanding for an ally’s definition of its vital interests 
even outside a strictly defined treaty area, and perhaps a little compassion 
for an occasional difference in judgments. 

George Kennan and Walter Lippmann, the two great adversaries in 
America’s earlier debate over containment, clearly thought so. George 
Kennan urged forbearance: 

We have fumbled on certain past occasions; and our friends have not 
turned against us. Moreover, we bear a heavy measure of responsibility 
for the desperation which has driven the French and British Govern- 
ments to this ill-conceived and pathetic action. 38 

Walter Lippmann went further and argued that America had a stake in 
British and French success: 

The Franco-British action will be judged by the outcome. . . . The Ameri- 
can interest, though we have dissented from the decision itself, is that 
France and Britain should now succeed. However much we may wish 
they had not started, we cannot now wish that they should fail. 39 

The third premise of America’s policy, its secret dream of emerging as 
the leader of the developing world, proved impossible to fulfill. Richard 
Nixon, probably the most sophisticated student of the national interest 
among America’s postwar leaders, placed America into the vanguard of 


545 



Diplomacy 


the anticolonial struggle on November 2, four days before the election, 
when he proclaimed: 

For the first time in history we have shown independence of Anglo- 
French policies toward Asia and Africa which seemed to us to reflea 
the colonial tradition. That declaration of independence has had an 
electrifying effect throughout the world. 40 

In the light of Nixon’s later pronouncements, it is hard to believe that he 
was doing anything other than following instructions. 

Yet that was not at all what actually happened. Nasser did not moderate 
his policies toward either the West or its Arab allies. His radical constitu- 
ency would not have permitted him to admit that he had been saved by 
American pressures even if he had been inclined to do so. On the con- 
trary, to impress that very constituency, he accelerated his attacks on 
moderate, pro-Western governments in the Middle East. Within two years 
of the Suez crisis, the pro-Western government of Iraq was overthrown 
and replaced by one of the most radical regimes in the Arab world, 
eventually giving rise to Saddam Hussein. Syria too turned increasingly 
radical. Within five years, Egyptian troops entered Yemen in what turned 
into a futile effort to overthrow the existing regime. Since, in the end, the 
United States inherited the strategic positions abandoned by Great Brit- 
ain, the full fury of Nasser’s radicalism was unleashed against America, 
culminating in a break of diplomatic relations in 1967. 

Nor did America improve its standing among the rest of the Non- 
aligned. Within a few months of the Suez crisis, America was no better off 
among the Nonaligned than Great Britain. It was not that the majority of 
the Nonaligned had suddenly become ill-disposed toward the United 
States, only that they had come to understand their leverage. What these 
nations remembered most about the Suez crisis was not America’s sup- 
port of Nasser but that Nasser had achieved major successes by his dexter- 
ity at playing the superpowers off against each other. The Suez crisis also 
served as the Nonaligned nations’ first exposure to another seminal truth 
of the Cold War: that applying pressure on the United States generally 
elicited protestations of good faith and efforts to alleviate the stated griev- 
ance, whereas applying pressure on the Soviet Union could be risky, 
because the Soviets’ invariable response was a tough dose of counterpres- 
sure. 

In the decades following the Suez crisis, these tendencies became 
magnified. Castigation of American policies turned into the ritual of 
Nonaligned conferences. Condemnation of Soviet actions in declarations 
published at the end of periodic Nonaligned meetings was extremely rare 


546 



Leapfrogging Containment; The Suez Crisis 


and circumspect. Since it was statistically unlikely that the United States 
was always wrong, the Nonaligned’s tilt had to reflect a calculation of 
interest, not a moral judgment. 

The most profound consequence of the Suez crisis ran along both 
sides of the fault line through Central Europe. Anwar Sadat, then chief 
propagandist for Egypt, wrote on November 19: 

There are only two Great Powers in the world today, the United States 

and the Soviet Union The ultimatum put Britain and France in their 

right place, as Powers neither big nor strong . 41 

America’s allies drew the same conclusion. The Suez crisis brought home 
to them that one of the premises of the Atlantic Alliance — the congruence 
of interests between Europe and the United States — was at best only 
partially valid. From this point on, the argument that Europe did not need 
nuclear weapons because it could always count on American support ran 
up against the memory of Suez. Great Britain, of course, had always had 
an independent deterrent. As for France, an article of November 9, 1956, 
in the French daily Le Populaire expressed what was to become a fixed 
French attitude: “The French government will without doubt take the 
decision shortly to manufacture nuclear weapons — The Soviet threat to 
use rockets has dissipated all fictions and illusions.” 42 

The Suez players were not alone in feeling the jolts of America’s dis- 
avowal of its closest allies. Chancellor Adenauer, as good a friend of 
America as there was in postwar Europe, vastly admired Dulles. Yet even 
he viewed America’s Suez diplomacy as a potential precursor of some 
kind of global arrangement between the United States and the Soviet 
Union for which Europe would end up paying the price. 

Adenauer happened to be in Paris on November 6, the day Eden and 
Mollet decided they would have to yield to American pressures. Ac- 
cording to French Foreign Minister Christian Pineau, Adenauer said: 

France and England will never be powers comparable to the United 
States and the Soviet Union. Nor Germany, either. There remains to 
them only one way of playing a decisive role in the world; that is to 
unite to make Europe. England is not ripe for it but the affair of Suez 
will help to prepare her spirits for it. We have no time to waste: Europe 
will be your revenge . 43 

This statement illuminates the reasoning behind later Franco-German 
policy, culminating in de Gaulle’s 1963 treaty of friendship and consulta- 
tion with Adenauer. 


547 



Diplomacy 


Great Britain, drawing many of the same analytical conclusions as 
France had about its own relative weakness, put them in the service of 
quite a different policy. Turning away from European unity, Great Britain 
opted for permanent subordination to American policy. Before Suez, 
Great Britain had already become well aware of its dependence on the 
United States, though it had continued to conduct itself as a Great Power. 
After Suez, it interpreted the “special relationship” with America as a 
means of gaining maximum influence over decisions which were essen- 
tially made in Washington. 

The most pernicious impact of the Suez crisis was on the Soviet Union. 
Within a year of the “spirit of Geneva,” the Soviet Union had managed to 
penetrate the Middle East, to put down a revolt in Hungary, and to 
threaten rocket attacks against Western Europe. Throughout, international 
opprobrium had focused on Great Britain and France, while much more 
brutal actions by the Soviet Union in Hungary had received at best per- 
functory condemnation. 

Khrushchev’s ideology and personality caused him to ascribe American 
conduct to weakness rather than to high principle. What had begun as a 
tentative Czechoslovakian arms deal with Egypt had turned into a major 
Soviet strategic breakthrough which divided the Atlantic Alliance and 
caused developing nations to turn to Moscow as a way of increasing their 
bargaining power. Khrushchev was euphoric. His high spirits propelled 
him onto a roller-coaster ride through one confrontation after another, 
starting with his Berlin ultimatum of 1958 and ending with his humiliation 
during the Cuban missile crisis of 1962. 

For all the pain it caused, the Suez crisis had marked America’s ascen- 
sion into world leadership. With a sigh of relief, America used the occa- 
sion of Suez to cut itself loose from allies it had always held accountable 
for the blight of Realpolitik and for their flawed devotion to the balance 
of power. But, life being what it is, America would not be permitted to 
remain pristine. Suez turned out to be America’s initiation into the reali- 
ties of global power, one of the lessons of which is that vacuums always 
get filled and that the principal issue is not whether, but by whom. Having 
evicted Great Britain and France from their historic roles in the Middle 
East, America found that responsibility for the balance of power in that 
region had fallen squarely on its own shoulders. 

On November 29, 1956, the United States government, hailing the re- 
cent Baghdad Pact summit of the leaders of Pakistan, Iraq, Turkey, and 
Iran, declared: “A threat to the territorial integrity or political indepen- 
dence of the members would be viewed by the United States with the 
utmost gravity.” 44 It was the diplomats’ way of saying that the United 


548 



Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 


States would undertake the defense of the Baghdad Pact states, a role for 
which Great Britain was now too weak and too discredited. 

On January 5, 1957, Eisenhower sent a message to the Congress asking 
for approval of what came to be known as the Eisenhower Doctrine — a 
threefold Middle East program of economic aid, military assistance, and 
protection against communist aggression. 45 In his State of the Union Ad- 
dress of January 10, 1957, Eisenhower went even further by proclaiming 
America’s commitment to the defense of the entire free world: 

First, America’s vital interests are worldwide, embracing both hemi- 
spheres and every continent. 

Second, we have community of interest with every nation in the free 
world. 

Third, interdependence of interests requires a decent respect for the 
rights and the peace of all peoples . 46 

America’s attempt to dissociate from Europe had landed it in the position 
of having to assume by itself the burden of protecting every free (that is, 
noncommunist) nation in every region of the globe. Though during the 
Suez crisis America was still attempting to deal with the ambiguities of 
equilibrium in the developing world via the United Nations, within two 
years American forces would be landing in Lebanon in pursuit of the 
Eisenhower Doctrine. A decade later, America would be grappling with it 
all alone in Vietnam, most of its allies having dissociated from it by 
invoking many an argument from the days of Suez as scripted by America 
itself. 


549 




CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 

Hungary : 

Upheaval in the Empire 


In 1956, two concurrent events transformed the postwar pattern of inter- 
national relations. The Suez crisis marked the end of innocence for the 
Western Alliance; henceforth, the Western allies would never again be 
able fully to believe in their own avowals of a perfect symmetry of inter- 
ests. Simultaneously, the bloody suppression of the Hungarian uprising 
showed that the Soviet Union would maintain its sphere of interest, by 
force if necessary, and that talk of liberation was empty. There could no 


550 


Hungary: Upheaval in the Empire 


longer be any doubt that the Cold War would be both protracted and 
bitter, with hostile armies facing each other across the dividing line of 
Europe as far into the future as anyone could see. 

The Hungarians’ doomed struggle against Soviet domination grew out 
of an explosive mix of historic Russian imperialism, Soviet ideology, and 
fierce Hungarian nationalism. In one sense, Hungary was just another 
victim of the Russian expansionism which had been going on relentlessly 
since the time of Peter the Great. Historically the Russian state had sought 
to repress nations trying to conduct a truly independent policy on Russia’s 
borders — a temptation which has persisted into the post-Cold War pe- 
riod. But that was usually only the beginning of Russia’s problems. After 
quelling independence, the Russians were obliged to maintain a costly 
military presence in the neighboring state, draining Russia’s treasury with- 
out enhancing Russia’s security. As George Kennan wrote, “. . . the Czars’ 
regime actually perished of indigestion (from) the Western minorities in 
Europe which it had been foolish enough to bite off .” 1 

The same pattern was repeated under communist rule. Stalin recov- 
ered all the tsarist territory that had been lost at the end of the First World 
War, and added what came to be known as the satellite orbit in Eastern 
Europe, occupied by the Red Army and controlled by Soviet-style govern- 
ments imposed from Moscow. Imperial rule, which was complicated 
enough under the tsars, grew even more problematic under the commu- 
nists, who compounded their subject populations’ hatred of foreign rule 
by imposing an untenable economic system. 

Soviet-style central planning proved intolerable in the long run, even 
in the Soviet Union; in the satellite orbit, it was disastrous from the start. 
Before the Second World War, Czechoslovakia’s standard of living had 
been comparable to that of Switzerland. Afterward, it was reduced to the 
gray and monotonous pattern which characterized the entire communist 
sphere. Poland had an industrial base as large as Italy’s and greater re- 
sources, but was sentenced to subsist at the Eastern European level of 
institutionalized poverty. East Germans saw the communist system as the 
sole obstacle to sharing in the economic well-being of the Federal Repub- 
lic. The population of every country in Eastern Europe was convinced 
that it was sacrificing its own well-being for the sake of communist ideol- 
ogy and Soviet hegemony. 

Whereas in the Soviet Union communism could present itself as an 
indigenous phenomenon, in Eastern Europe there could be no question 
that it had been imposed under duress and that ancient national traditions 
were being suffocated. Even with full control over the police, the mass 
media, and the educational system, the communists in the satellite states 


551 



Diplomacy 


were — and felt themselves to be — a beleaguered minority. Lenin had 
written that it would be folly for the Bolsheviks to follow the policies of 
Tsar Nicholas II by imposing their ways on their neighbors. But by the 
time of Stalin’s death, the main distinction between communist rule and 
that of the autocratic tsar was that Stalin had in fact been far more brutal 
and heavy-handed. Ultimately, Soviet policy came up against the same 
problem that had confounded Russia earlier in its history: Eastern Europe, 
communized to enhance the security of the Soviet state, consumed re- 
sources and high-level attention to the point of becoming more of a 
burden than a strategic prize. 

Stalin believed that the Eastern European satellites could only be held 
in place by total and intrusive control from Moscow. In 1948, Tito, the 
only communist ruler in Eastern Europe who had come to power largely 
by his own efforts, let it be known that Belgrade would pursue its own 
course independent of directives from Moscow. Stalin retaliated by expel- 
ling Yugoslavia from the Cominform. Belying Stalin’s expectation that 
he would collapse quickly, Tito survived, with the aid of the Western 
democracies, which temporarily suspended their ideological objections 
to old-fashioned balance-of-power considerations. 

Stalin reacted to Tito’s show of independence by resorting to his tried- 
and-true method for restoring discipline — show trials throughout the 
satellite orbit, leading to the juridical murder of anybody capable of 
independent thought. As in the Moscow purges of the previous decade, 
few — if any — of the victims of this latest terror had engaged in opposi- 
tion. They were, after all, lifelong communists who had served as the 
instruments of Soviet-imposed communist rule: Rudolf Slansky in 
Czechoslovakia, Laszlo Rajk in Hungary, Traicho Rostov in Bulgaria, and 
Wladyslaw Gomulka in Poland (the only one who survived). The purge 
of these men, all of whom their publics had regarded as tools of Moscow, 
brought home the moral bankruptcy of the communist system even to 
those few who still believed in its pronouncements. 

Too insecure to pursue the tyrant’s brand of repression, Stalin’s succes- 
sors were also too divided to permit heterodoxy within the Soviet bloc. 
They were caught up in two contradictory fears: that repression in Eastern 
Europe would thwart the much-needed relaxation of tensions with the 
West, and that liberalization in the satellite orbit might lead to the collapse 
of the whole communist edifice. (Fear of Western reaction had not, how- 
ever, kept them from sending tanks to put down an East German uprising 
in June of 1953.) By 1955, they had decided to live with Eastern European 
nationalism as long as a country’s leadership remained safely communist, 
and they chose reconciliation with Tito as the appropriate symbol of their 


552 



HUNGARY: UPHEAVAL IN THE EMPIRE 


new approach. In May 1955, Khrushchev and Bulganin visited Belgrade 
to patch things up. However, as was to be the case with every subsequent 
attempt at reform, the effort to liberalize served to open the floodgates. 

After Khrushchev’s speech to the Twentieth Party Congress in February 
1956 detailing Stalin’s crimes, communism was discredited even further. 
The exception was Yugoslavia, where it had grafted itself onto a national- 
istic cause. It soon transpired that Stalin had correctly understood the 
Titoist threat to the Soviet Union. For the leaders of the satellite countries 
faced the paradox that, in order to achieve any kind of public approval, 
they needed to acquire some nationalistic credentials. They had to pres- 
ent themselves as Polish, Czech, or Hungarian communists rather than as 
puppets of the Kremlin. In the wake of Khrushchev’s visit to Belgrade, 
the Kremlin’s control over the satellite regimes of Eastern Europe came 
under increasing stress. 

Throughout these events, the United States maintained an essentially 
passive attitude. A central premise of containment had been to leave the 
liberation of Eastern Europe to the erosion of time and not to challenge 
Soviet control frontally. During the 1952 presidential campaign, John 
Foster Dulles attacked this policy as being too passive in an article in Life 
magazine entitled “A Policy of Boldness.” Dulles argued that the nations 
of Eastern Europe — for which he coined the term “captive nations” — 
were close to despair, “because the United States, the historic leader of 
the forces of freedom, seems dedicated to the negative policy of ‘contain- 
ment’ and ‘stalemate.’ ” He urged the United States to make “it publicly 
known that it wants and expects liberation to occur.” 2 

Yet what did “liberation” mean operationally? Dulles was too serious a 
student of Soviet affairs to respond brutally to doubt that the Soviet Union 
would suppress any upheaval. After all, Stalin was still alive when Dulles 
wrote his article. Dulles therefore explicitly rejected the encouragement 
of “a series of bloody uprisings and reprisals.” What he had in mind, 
Dulles said, was “peaceful separation from Moscow” on the Tito model, 
helped along by American propaganda and other nonmilitary measures. 

Whereas Acheson had supported Tito after his break with Moscow 
based on Realpolitik, Dulles imbued essentially the same policy with a 
touch of universal idealism by calling it “liberation.” In practice, Dulles’ 
liberation theory was an attempt to increase the cost to Moscow of consol- 
idating its conquests without increasing the risks for the United States. 
Dulles was encouraging Titoism, not democracy, and the difference be- 
tween his ideas and those of Acheson turned out to be an oratorical 
nuance. 

To be sure, Dulles’ critics ascribed to him views on freeing Eastern 


553 



Diplomacy 


Europe which he had not actually expressed. But it was also the case that 
he refrained from correcting them. Dulles had been a principal patron of 
institutions such as Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, the major pur- 
pose of which was to keep the principles of freedom alive in Eastern 
Europe while encouraging sentiments capable of igniting revolt. There 
was nothing subtle about Radio Free Europe’s approach. On the theory 
that its pronouncements were not official, it advocated “liberation” in the 
most literal and militant sense of the word. Unfortunately, the distinction 
between the “private” and “official” musings of government-financed 
American institutions proved too elusive for East European freedom 
fighters to comprehend. 

It thus happened that, at almost precisely the same moment that the 
Western democracies were preoccupied with Suez, the Soviet Union 
found itself in severe straits in two of its key satellites, Poland and Hun- 
gary. 

Poland was the first to ignite. In June, riots in the industrial city of 
Poznan were bloodily suppressed and resulted in dozens of deaths and 
hundreds more wounded. In October, those leaders on the Polish Com- 
munist Party’s Central Committee who had survived Stalin’s purges of 
the previous years decided to ally themselves with the cause of Polish 
nationalism. Gomulka, purged and disgraced in 1951, was asked to return 
as First Secretary of the Communist Party, attending his first Politburo 
meeting on October 13, 1956. Soviet Marshal Konstantin Rokossovsky, 
who had been installed as Defense Minister and had been imposed as a 
member of the Polish Politburo since 1949, was dismissed, ending one of 
the most humiliating symbols of Soviet tutelage. The Polish Communist 
Party issued a proclamation that Poland would henceforth pursue a “na- 
tional road to socialism,” a statement which, given Poland’s passionate 
nationalist feelings and indifference to socialism, could hardly have 
sounded reassuring to Moscow. 

For a moment, the Kremlin toyed with the idea of military intervention. 
Soviet tanks began to move toward the principal cities when, on October 
19, Khrushchev, accompanied by his Politburo colleagues Kaganovich, 
Mikoyan, and Molotov, descended on Warsaw. 

The Polish leaders did not blink. They informed the Soviet General 
Secretary that his visit was not being treated as a party-to-party meeting 
and that he would therefore not be received at the Communist Party 
Central Committee headquarters. Instead, the Soviet delegation was asked 
to repair to the Belvedere Palace, which was reserved for state guests. 

At the last moment, Khrushchev recoiled. On October 20, Soviet troops 
were ordered to withdraw to their bases. On October 22, Khrushchev 


554 



Hungary. Upheaval in the Empire 


endorsed Gomulka’s installation as General Secretary of the Communist 
Party in exchange for the promise that the new leaders would preserve 
the socialist system and maintain Poland’s membership in the Warsaw 
Pact. Formally, the Soviet defense system had remained intact. Neverthe- 
less, the reliability of the Polish troops in any war with the West could no 
longer be considered unqualified, to put it charitably. 

The Soviet Union backed down and permitted national communism to 
carry the day in Poland, in part because repression would have meant 
coping with a population of over 30 million whose proven courage and 
willingness to resist foreigners was magnified by memories of historic 
Russian oppression and Soviet atrocities. But most important, at the same 
moment the Kremlin was being tested even more severely in Hungary. 

A country of 9 million people, Hungary had undergone the same cycle 
of Soviet oppression as its neighbors. Since the 1940s, it had been gov- 
erned by the ruthless Matyas Rakosi, an orthodox Stalinist. In the 1930s 
Stalin had actually ransomed him from a Budapest prison in return for 
Hungarian flags captured by the tsar’s army in 1849. Many Hungarians 
would have reason to regret that bargain when Rakosi returned with the 
Red Army and set up a system of repression that was considered severe 
even by Stalinist standards. 

Shortly after the Berlin uprising of 1953, Rakosi’s time finally ran out 
Summoned to Moscow, he was told by Beria in the inimitably brutal 
Stalinist fashion that, although Hungary had been ruled by diverse nation- 
alities, it had never had a Jewish king, and the Soviet leadership was not 
about to allow one now. 3 Rakosi was replaced by Imre Nagy, who had the 
reputation of being a reform communist and, as it happened, was a Jew 
as well — though he applied less tyrannical methods. Two years later, after 
the overthrow of Georgi Malenkov in Moscow, Nagy was dismissed and 
Rakosi returned as Prime Minister. Once again, strict communist ortho- 
doxy was imposed. Artists and intellectuals were repressed, and Nagy was 
expelled from the Communist Party. 

Stalin’s successors lacked his deadly single-mindedness, however. Not 
only was Nagy permitted to survive, he published a treatise challenging 
the Soviet Union’s right to intervene in the domestic affairs of fellow 
communist states. Meanwhile, Rakosi, now in his second tour of power, 
proved to be no more responsive to the aspirations of his people than he 
had been during his first. After Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin at the 
Twentieth Party Congress, Rakosi was again replaced, this time by his 
close associate Erno Gero. 

Though Gero proclaimed himself a nationalist, he was so closely identi- 
fied with Rakosi that he was unable to stem the patriotic tide sweeping 


555 



Diplomacy 


the country. On October 23, the day after Gomulka’s formal return to 
power in Poland, public outrage boiled over in Budapest. Students dis- 
tributed a list of demands that went considerably beyond the reforms that 
had been achieved in Poland; these included freedom of speech, a trial 
for Rakosi and his associates, the departure of Soviet troops, and Nagy’s 
return to office. When Nagy appeared before a huge throng in Parliament 
Square, he was still a reform communist and his program consisted of 
introducing some democratic procedures into the communist system. He 
asked the disappointed crowd to have confidence that the Communist 
Party would implement the reforms needed. 

But it was too late to ask the Hungarian people to entrust the hated 
Communist Party with rectifying its own transgressions. What happened 
next was straight out of a movie in which the main character is induced, 
reluctantly and perhaps even uncomprehendingly, to undertake a mission 
he did not choose that then turns into his destiny. A staunch, if reformist, 
communist his entire life, Nagy seemed determined in his initial appear- 
ances during the uprising to salvage the Communist Party, much as Go- 
mulka had done in Poland. But as the days passed, he was transformed 
by the passions of his people into a living symbol of the truth laid down 
by de Tocqueville a century earlier: 

. . . experience suggests that the most dangerous moment for an evil 
government is usually when it begins to reform itself. Only great inge- 
nuity can save a prince who undertakes to give relief to his subjects 
after long oppression. The sufferings that are endured patiently, as 
being inevitable, become intolerable the moment it appears that there 
might be an escape. Reform then only serves to reveal more clearly 
what still remains oppressive and now all the more unbearable. 4 

Nagy was to pay with his life for the vision of democracy that overtook 
him so belatedly. After the Soviets crushed the revolution, they offered 
Nagy the opportunity to recant. His refusal and subsequent execution 
assured him a place in the pantheon of those martyred to the cause of 
freedom in Eastern Europe. 

On October 24, public demonstrations turned into a full-blown revolu- 
tion. Soviet tanks, hastily entering the fray, were set on fire and govern- 
ment buildings were seized. On the same day, Nagy was appointed Prime 
Minister and two members of the Soviet Politburo, Mikoyan and Suslov, 
arrived in Hungary to assess the situation. By October 28, the Soviet 
visitors appeared to have reached a conclusion similar to the one Khru- 
shchev had drawn in Warsaw — to settle for a Titoist Hungary. Soviet tanks 


556 



Hungary: Upheaval in the Empire 


began to withdraw from Budapest. But even that move could not calm 
matters as it had in Poland. The demonstrators were now demanding 
nothing less than the establishment of a multiparty system, the departure 
of Soviet troops from all of Hungary, and withdrawal from the Warsaw 
Pact. 

As these events unfolded, American policy remained ostentatiously cir- 
cumspect. Despite all its talk of “liberation,” Washington had clearly not 
anticipated so elemental an outburst. It seemed torn between a desire to 
help the process along as much as possible and its fear that too forward 
a policy would give the Soviets a pretext for intervention. Above all, 
Washington demonstrated that it is rarely able to handle two major crises 
simultaneously. While Hungarian students and workers battled Soviet 
tanks in the streets, Washington stood silent. Moscow was never warned 
that the threat or the use of force would jeopardize its relations with 
Washington. 

The United States did appeal to the Security Council on October 27, in 
light of “the situation created by the action of foreign military forces in 
Hungary.” 5 But it was dealt with in so desultory a fashion that a vote on 
the resulting Security Council resolution did not come until November 4, 
after the Soviet intervention had already occurred. 

The interval was filled by Radio Free Europe, which took it upon itself 
to interpret American attitudes, urging Hungarians to step up the pace of 
their revolution and to reject any compromise. For example, on October 
29, Radio Free Europe greeted Imre Nagy’s installation as the new Prime 
Minister with this hostile broadcast: 

Imre Nagy and his supporters want to revise and modernize the Trojan 
Horse episode. They need a cease-fire so that the present government 
in power in Budapest can maintain its position as long as possible. 
Those who are fighting for liberty must not lose sight even for a minute 
of the plans of the government opposing them. 6 

When, on October 30, Nagy abolished the one-party system and ap- 
pointed a coalition government composed of representatives of all the 
democratic parties that had participated in the last free elections, in 1946, 
Radio Free Europe remained unconvinced: 

The Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of the Interior are still in 
Communist hands. Do not let this continue, Freedom Fighters. Do not 
hang your weapons on the wall. 7 

Although Radio Free Europe was funded by the American government, it 
was run by an independent board and by administrators who did not 


557 



Diplomacy 


receive official instructions from the administration. However, it was too 
much to expect Hungary’s freedom fighters to understand the distinction 
between the United States government and the pronouncements of a 
radio station which had been expressly created as a vehicle for promul- 
gating the “liberation” policy which the Secretary of State had claimed to 
be his own invention. 

On the few occasions the Eisenhower Administration did speak out, 
it seemed above all eager to reassure the Soviets. Unintentionally, its 
pronouncements proved nearly as inflammatory as the Radio Free Europe 
broadcasts. On October 27, as Soviet troops seemed to be pulling out of 
the Hungarian capital, Dulles delivered a speech in Dallas which made it 
seem as if the United States was hoping to lure Hungary out of the Soviet 
orbit without Moscow’s noticing it. Any Eastern European country that 
broke with Moscow, said Dulles, could count on American aid. Nor would 
this aid be conditioned “upon the adoption by these countries of any 
particular form of society.” In other words, to be eligible for American 
aid, an Eastern European country did not need to become democratic; it 
was enough for it to pursue the Titoist model, and to leave the Warsaw 
Pact. In an archetypal American statement, Dulles coupled this comment 
with an assertion of selflessness. According to its Secretary of State, the 
United States had “no ulterior purpose in desiring the independence of 
the satellite countries,” nor did it look upon them as “potential military 
allies.” 8 

Far from proving reassuring, that staple of American diplomatic rheto- 
ric — the claim to an absence of any ulterior motive — has usually been 
interpreted as a sign of either unpredictability or arbitrariness, even 
among non-Marxist leaders. At any rate, at that point Moscow was far 
more anxious about American actions than about American motives. Eight 
years earlier, Moscow had vetoed Eastern European participation in the 
Marshall Plan because it had perceived American economic aid as a form 
of capitalist ensnarement. Dulles’ offer of economic aid to defectors from 
the Warsaw Pact was bound to confirm that specter. The potential political 
earthquake was rendered all the more credible by Dulles’ flamboyant 
implication that Hungary’s reversal of its military alliances was being 
prevented, above all, by American self-restraint. 

Paralleling Dulles’ course of incendiary reassurance to the Soviets, Ei- 
senhower delivered a speech on October 31 which was particularly nota- 
ble for its omission of so much as a hint that the Soviet Union would 
incur penalties if it resorted to repression. Eisenhower was probably 
persuaded to adopt a conciliatory tone because, the day before, the Soviet 
Union had promulgated seemingly forthcoming, if ambiguous, criteria 


558 



Hungary: Upheaval in the Empire 


for the stationing of Soviet troops in Eastern Europe. At the same time, 
Eisenhower must have been aware of the massive movement of Soviet 
reinforcements into the rest of Hungary, which had begun simultane- 
ously. Eisenhower’s restraint toward the Soviet Union was all the more 
remarkable when compared to his castigation of Great Britain and France 
regarding Suez in the same broadcast. 

With respect to Hungary, Eisenhower emphasized that, although the 
United States hoped for an end to Soviet domination of Eastern Europe, 
“we could not, of course, carry out this policy by resort to force.” 9 For 
such a course would be “contrary both to the best interests of the Eastern 
European peoples and to the abiding principles of the United Nations,” 10 
a truth which had clearly eluded both Radio Free Europe and the freedom 
fighters, who were at that moment pleading for American help. Mean- 
while, Eisenhower continued, he had endeavored “to remove any false 
fears that we would look upon new governments in these Eastern Euro- 
pean countries as potential military allies. We have no such ulterior pur- 
pose. We see these peoples as friends, and we wish simply that they be 
friends who are free.” 11 

Americas disavowal of ulterior motives sounded no more persuasive 
to the Kremlin coming from the President than it had been from the 
lips of his Secretary of State. The Soviets, who conducted foreign policy 
according to a mixture of Marxist ideology and Russian national interests, 
simply could not understand the American disavowal of having any selfish 
motives. But the renunciation of force was something the Politburo could 
comprehend, for this would eliminate its greatest fear should it decide to 
settle scores in Eastern Europe, as it was obviously preparing to do. 

The irony of the Eisenhower Administration’s two formal statements in 
the midst of the Hungarian Revolution was that both should have been so 
unintentionally provocative. The reassurance that America sought no al- 
lies in Eastern Europe disquieted the leaders in the Kremlin because it 
sounded as if Eastern Europe were acquiring the option to reverse alli- 
ances; Americas renunciation of force inflamed the crisis by easing Soviet 
apprehensions about the American reaction if the Red Army crushed the 
uprising. 

In the meantime, matters in Budapest had spun out of the control of 
even the reformist political leadership. On October 30, revolutionaries 
seized the Budapest office of the Communist Party and massacred its 
occupants, including, oddly enough, one of Nagy’s closest associates. That 
afternoon, Nagy announced the formation of a new government on the 
basis existing in 1945, during the regime of the democratic parties’ coali- 
tion. The end of communist one-party rule was symbolized by the pres- 


559 



Diplomacy 


ence in the Cabinet of Bela Kovacz as a representative of the bourgeois 
Small Holders’ Party. A few years earlier, Kovacz had been indicted for 
treason. In addition, Cardinal Mindszenty, long a symbol of opposition to 
communism, was released from prison and spoke before enthusiastic 
crowds. Demanding the withdrawal of Soviet troops from all of Hungary, 
Nagy began negotiations with the two Politburo emissaries, Mikoyan and 
Suslov, to that effect. A host of political parties opened offices and began 
to publish newspapers or pamphlets. 

After giving Nagy the impression that his proposal was negotiable, 
Mikoyan and Suslov left for Moscow, ostensibly to prepare for the next 
round of talks. That same evening of October 31, both Pravda and Izvestia 
published an official Kremlin statement, promulgated the day before, that 
the stationing of foreign troops in a fellow communist country required 
the approval of the host country and of the entire Warsaw Pact: 

. . . stationing the troops of one or another state which is a member of 
the Warsaw Treaty on the territory of another state which is a member 
of the treaty is done by agreement among all its members and only 
with the consent of the state on the territory of which and at the request 
of which these troops are stationed or it is planned to station them. 12 

On the basis of these words, Eisenhower included a highly optimistic 
interpretation of the Soviet Government declaration in his October 31 
broadcast, noted above: . . if the Soviet Union indeed faithfully acts 
upon its announced intention, the world will witness the greatest forward 
stride toward justice, trust and understanding among nations in our gen- 
eration.” 33 

As forthcoming as the Soviet statement sounded on the question of 
general principle, Washington had ignored two crucial caveats: first, the 
implication that the withdrawal of troops required the same procedure 
as their stationing, which gave the Soviet Union a veto; second, the para- 
graphs specifically addressed to Hungary with the ominous warning that 
the Soviet Union would not “permit” what it defined as Hungary’s “social- 
ist achievements” to be abandoned, and would defend them together 
with the other socialist countries if necessary: 

To guard the socialist achievements of people’s-democratic Hungary is 
the chief and sacred duty of the workers, peasants, intelligentsia, of all 
the Hungarian working people at the present moment. 

The Soviet government expresses confidence that the peoples of the 
socialist countries will not permit foreign and domestic reactionary 


560 



Hungary: Upheaval in the Empire 


forces to shake the foundations of the people’s democratic system 

[T]hey will strengthen the fraternal unity and mutual aid of the socialist 
countries to buttress the great cause of peace and socialism. 14 

What the statement referred to as the “people’s democratic Hungary” had 
ceased to call itself that and was, in fact, no longer in a position to 
preserve either itself or its so-called socialist achievements. Nagy, a life- 
long member of the communist cadre, could not have failed to under- 
stand the import of the Soviet warnings, or of the changes he was himself 
fostering. Yet, by this time, Nagy, caught between the fury of his people 
and the implacability of his communist allies, was riding a tide he could 
neither control nor direct. Unlike the Polish people, the Hungarians were 
demanding not the liberalization of the communist regime but its very 
destruction; not equality with the Soviet Union, but a total break from it. 

On November 1, having already created what was in effect a coalition 
government, Nagy took the final, irrevocable step of declaring Hungary’s 
neutrality and its withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact. This too went far 
beyond anything Gomulka had attempted in Poland. In a dignified state- 
ment that was to serve as his death sentence, Nagy announced on Hungar- 
ian radio; 

The Hungarian national Government, imbued with profound responsi- 
bility toward the Hungarian people and history, and giving expression 
to the undivided will of the Hungarian millions, declares the neutrality 
of the Hungarian People’s Republic 
The Hungarian people, on the basis of independence and equality 
and in accordance with the spirit of the U.N. Charter, wishes to live in 
true friendship with its neighbors, the Soviet Union, and all the peoples 
of the world. The Hungarian people desires the consolidation and 
further development of the achievements of its national revolution 
without joining any power blocs. 15 


At the same time, Nagy asked the United Nations to recognize Hungarian 
neutrality. He never received a reply. 

The pathos of Nagy’s appeal was matched by the indifference with 
which the so-called world community received it. Neither the United 
States nor its European allies took steps to induce the United Nations to 
deal with Nagy’s message on an urgent basis. And the Soviets were be- 
yond appeals to moderation. On the morning of November 4, the Soviet 
forces which had been pouring into Hungary for days struck without 
warning and savagely suppressed the Hungarian Revolution. Janos Kadar, 


561 



Diplomacy 


a former victim of Stalin’s purges whom Nagy had elevated to General 
Secretary of the Communist Party and who had mysteriously disappeared 
a few days earlier, returned with the Soviet troops to establish a new 
communist government. Pal Maleter, the Commander of the Hungarian 
army, was arrested while negotiating Soviet troop withdrawals with the 
Commander of Soviet forces in Hungary. Nagy, who had taken refuge in 
the Yugoslav embassy, accepted a promise of safe passage to Yugoslavia 
but was arrested when he left the building. Cardinal Mindszenty took 
refuge in the American legation, where he was to remain until 1971. Nagy 
and Maleter were later executed. Stalin’s spirit remained alive and well 
in the Kremlin. 

Not until November 4 did the United Nations, which, throughout this 
entire critical period of Soviet troop buildup, had been exclusively occu- 
pied with denouncing Great Britain and France over Suez, finally turn to 
what was by then the Hungarian tragedy. A Security Council resolution 
asking the Soviet Union to withdraw was quickly vetoed by the Soviet 
Ambassador. A special session of the General Assembly voted on a similar 
resolution affirming Hungary’s right to independence and demanding 
the dispatch of United Nations observers to Hungary. It was the second 
resolution of that fateful day, the General Assembly having meanwhile 
created a United Nations emergency force for the Middle East. The Middle 
East resolution passed unanimously, with even Great Britain and France 
joining the consensus. The Hungarian resolution passed by a vote of fifty 
to eight with fifteen abstentions. The Soviet bloc voted against it, while 
such leaders of the Nonaligned group as India and Yugoslavia abstained, 
as did every Arab country. The Middle East resolution was implemented; 
the Hungarian resolution was ignored. 

In the aftermath of the brutally suppressed Hungarian uprising, the 
question arose whether a more forceful and imaginative Western diplo- 
macy might have forestalled or eased the tragedy. Clearly, Soviet troops 
in Hungary had been massively reinforced over a period of many days. 
Was it within the power of the democracies to have kept them from 
striking? The American government had itself first raised the banner of 
liberation. Its propaganda via Radio Free Europe had produced a surge 
of hope exceeding even what Dulles had predicted in his 1952 Life article. 
When Hungary exploded, the American legation in Budapest must have 
conveyed to the State Department what every journalist knew: that the 
political structure of communist Hungary was dissolving. With the re- 
markable array of Kremlinologists such as Charles Bohlen, Llewellyn 
Thompson, Foy Kohler, and George Kennan available for advice, it is hard 
to believe that the State Department did not at least consider the possibil- 


562 



HUNGARY: UPHEAVAL IN THE EMPIRE 


ity of Soviet military intervention. In any event, the Eisenhower Adminis- 
tration made no effort to raise the cost of Soviet intervention. 

During the upheaval in Hungary, America fell far short of its rhetoric. 
The unwillingness to risk war to overturn communist control of Eastern 
Europe had been explicit American policy for a decade. But Washingtons 
failure to explore seriously any option short of war in order to affect 
events opened up a huge gap between what Washington had proclaimed 
and what it was actually prepared to support. The United States never 
explained the limits of American support to the fledgling, inexperienced 
Hungarian government. Nor did it, through the many channels available 
to it, ever advise the Hungarians about how to consolidate their gains 
before taking further, irrevocable, steps. In its communications with the 
Soviet leadership, the United States relied largely on public statements 
which ended up creating incentives that were quite the opposite of what 
the Eisenhower Administration had intended. 

A firmer, clearer American stance would have been essential to render 
the Soviet decision to intervene less calculable, or at least not quite so 
seemingly devoid of consequence. The Kremlin could have been warned 
that repression in Hungary would involve major political and economic 
costs, and put a freeze on East-West relations for the foreseeable future. 
The American and United Nations stance on Hungary could have been 
made more consistent with the reaction to Suez. Instead, America and 
its allies acted as if they were bystanders, with no direct stake in the 
outcome. 

The democracies were in no position to go to war over Hungary, but 
they could have raised the specter of the political and economic costs of 
Soviet repression. As it was, the Kremlin paid next to no price for its 
actions, not even economically. A little over two years after the Hungarian 
tragedy, and despite a Soviet ultimatum over Berlin, British Prime Minis- 
ter Harold Macmillan visited Moscow in what was the first visit there by a 
prime minister since the war; within three years, Eisenhower and Khru- 
shchev were celebrating the spirit of Camp David. 

Suez provided an occasion for the Arab nations, as well as for such 
leaders of the Nonaligned as India and Yugoslavia, to assail Great Britain 
and France. Yet, when it came to Hungary, this same group of nations 
refused to criticize Soviet actions, much less to condemn them in the 
United Nations. Some relationship between United Nations votes on Hun- 
gary and Suez would have been desirable. At the least, American mea- 
sures against Great Britain and France should have been geared to 
reciprocal attitudes by the Nonaligned nations toward Soviet actions in 
Hungary. As it turned out, the Soviet Union s acts in Hungary cost it no 


563 



Diplomacy 


influence among the Nonaligned, while the United States garnered 
no additional influence among that group as a result of its stand over 
Suez. 

In the 1950s, the so-called Nonaligned group represented a novel ap- 
proach to international relations. Neutral nations had, of course, always 
existed, but their distinguishing feature had been a passive foreign policy. 
By contrast, the Nonaligned of the Cold War period did not perceive 
their neutrality to require noninvolvement. They were active, occasionally 
shrill, players promoting agendas established in forums designed to pool 
their strengths and enhance their influence, in effect forming an alliance 
of the Nonaligned. Though they were highly vocal in their complaints 
about international tensions, they knew how to profit from them. They 
learned how to play the superpowers off against each other. And since 
they feared the Soviet Union more than they did the United States, they 
generally sided with the communists without feeling any reciprocal need 
to apply the same moral stringency to the Soviet Union as they did toward 
the United States. 

On November 16, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru presented to the 
Indian Parliament his own turgid rationale for why India had refused to 
approve the United Nations resolution condemning Soviet acts in Hun- 
gary. 16 The facts, he said, were “obscure”; the resolution was improperly 
worded; and the call for free elections supervised by the United Nations 
was a violation of Hungary’s national sovereignty. 

The facts had been anything but obscure, and India’s reaction was 
entirely in keeping with the practices of Realpolitik. Quite simply, India 
did not want to give up Soviet support in international forums; it saw no 
point in incurring Soviet wrath and sacrificing potential arms supplies 
over some distant European country when China and Pakistan stood on 
its own borders, and the Soviet Union itself was not so very distant. 

India did not conceive of foreign policy as a debate in the Oxford 
Union, however its diplomats might pretend that they were in the dis- 
criminating audience with the right to choose a winner purely on the 
basis of moral merit. India’s leaders had attended schools in England and 
had read American classics. They combined the rhetoric of Wilson and 
Gladstone with the practices of Disraeli and Theodore Roosevelt. From 
the Indians’ point of view, this made eminent sense as long as their 
interlocutors did not delude themselves into thinking that Indian rhetoric 
was a guide to Indian practice, or that Indian foreign policy was governed 
by abstract, superior morality. 

On December 18, six weeks after the Hungarian tragedy, Dulles ex- 
plained the reasoning behind America’s response to the uprising at a 


564 



Hungary: Upheaval in the Empire 


press conference. Amazingly, he was still trying to reassure the Soviet 
Union of America’s peaceful intentions: 

... we have no desire to surround the Soviet Union with a band of 
hostile states and to revive what used to be called the cordon sanitaire , 
which was developed largely by the French after the First World War 
with a view to circling the Soviet Union with hostile forces. We have 
made clear our policy in that respect in the hope of facilitating in that 
way an evolution — a peaceful evolution — of the satellite states toward 
genuine independence. 17 

It was an astonishing statement. What, after all, was containment if not an 
attempt to surround the Soviet Union with forces capable of resisting its 
expansionism? Equally remarkable was Dulles’ apologetic tone so soon 
after a demonstration of Soviet ruthlessness in Hungary and a simultane- 
ous display of saber-rattling in the Middle East. At a press conference in 
Australia on March 13, 1937, Dulles bluntly summed up the American 
attitude. A lawyer at heart, he rested his case on the absence of any legal 
obligation: 

. . . there was no basis for our giving military aid to Hungary. We had 
no commitment to do so, and we did not think that to do so would 
either assist the people of Hungary or the people of Europe or the rest 
of the world. 18 

Dulles continued missing the point. The issue was not a legal one; not 
whether America had fulfilled its commitments but whether it had lived 
up to the implications of its pronouncements. 

Having proclaimed a universal mission, it was inevitable that America 
would encounter gaps between its principles and its national interest. 
The confluence of Suez and Hungary was one such occasion. America’s 
great dream had always been a foreign policy which carries all before it 
by the compelling and universal nature of its maxims. Yet for a decade, 
American policymakers had been frustrated by the ambiguities of world 
leadership — by the concessions to imperfect causes that are grist for the 
mill of day-to-day diplomacy, and by the attention that must be paid to 
the views of allies with very different historical perspectives. Suez had 
seemed to provide an occasion for remedying this defect and for bringing 
policy into correspondence with principle. The very pain associated with 
the act of turning on its closest allies had the effect of penance in that it 
served to reconsecrate America’s moral purity. 


565 



Diplomacy 


Hungary was a more complex case, for it would have required the 
application of power in some form. Yet America’s leaders were not will- 
ing to risk American lives for a cause which, however offensive to their 
consciences, involved no direct American security interest. Principle per- 
mits no ambiguity and no gradations. In Suez, America could insist on 
the pure application of its maxims because the consequences involved 
no immediate risk. In Hungary, it acquiesced to Realpolitik, just as other 
nations do, because insistence on principle would have carried with it 
the unavoidable risk of war, perhaps even nuclear war. And when lives 
are at stake, the statesman owes it both to his people and to himself to 
explain the relationship between the risks and the interests, however 
broadly and generously these may be defined. The Soviet Union was 
clearly prepared to run bigger risks to preserve its position in Eastern 
Europe than the United States was willing to brave in order to liberate 
Hungary. Nothing could get around this equation. In terms of its rhetoric 
prior to the uprising, America’s policy on Hungary was weak indeed; in 
terms of its interests, the refusal to run the risk of war was both inevitable 
and fitting — though it does not explain the reluctance to raise the cost of 
Soviet intervention by nonmilitary means. 

The juxtaposition of Hungary and Suez established the coordinates of 
the next phase of the Cold War. The Soviet Union had managed to pre- 
serve its position in Eastern Europe; the democracies — including the 
United States — had suffered a relative decline in their position in the 
Middle East. The Soviet Union had found a way to bypass containment. 
The day after its troops had ravaged Budapest, and while the fighting was 
still going on, Khrushchev was threatening rocket attacks on Western 
Europe and inviting the United States to undertake joint military action in 
the Middle East against its closest allies. The United States had left Hun- 
gary adrift in the sea of historical evolution, and American allies with a 
sense of their impotence. 

What was not clear at the time was the inherent weakness of the Soviet 
Union. Ironically, the communist proponents of the relationship of forces 
had launched themselves on an enterprise they would prove incapable 
of sustaining. The communist leaders might declaim about objective fac- 
tors to their hearts’ content, but the fact remained that the only revolu- 
tions taking place in developed countries were occurring inside the 
communist sphere. In the long run, the Soviet Union would have been 
safer and economically stronger if it had surrounded itself with Finnish- 
style governments in Eastern Europe because it would not have needed 
to assume responsibility for the internal stability and economic progress 
of those countries. Instead, imperialism in Eastern Europe drained Soviet 


566 



HUNGARY: UPHEAVAL IN THE EMPIRE 


resources and frightened the Western democracies, without enhancing 
Soviet strength. Communism could never translate its control of 
government and media into public acceptance. If the communist leaders 
of Eastern Europe did not want to sit entirely on Soviet bayonets, they 
were obliged to adapt to the programs of their nationalist opponents. 
Thus, after an initial period of bloody terror, Kadar gradually moved 
toward the goals charted by Nagy, though he stopped short of withdraw- 
ing from the Warsaw Pact. A generation later, latent Soviet weakness 
would cast the Hungarian uprising as a harbinger of the ultimate bank- 
ruptcy of the communist system. Despite all that had happened, within 
ten years Hungary was to be internally freer than Poland and its foreign 
policy more independent of the Soviet Union. And thirty-five years later, 
in the next phase of Moscow’s attempt at liberalization, the Soviets would 
entirely lose control over events. 

The outcome of 1956 contributed to another generation of suffering 
and oppression. However short the interval before the final collapse may 
seem to historians, it cannot begin to measure the anguish which the 
totalitarian nature of the system imposed on its countless victims. In the 
immediate aftermath, Moscow — misreading the balance of forces as 
much as the capitalists had — found every reason to be satisfied. Interpre- 
ting the year’s events as a tilt in the balance of forces in its favor, the 
Politburo embarked on its gravest challenge yet of the Cold War — the 
ultimatums over Berlin. 


567 



CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 


Khrushchev s Ultimatum: 
The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


At the Potsdam Conference, the three victors had decided that Berlin 
would be governed by the four occupying powers — the United States, 
Great Britain, France, and the Soviet Union — which would jointly admin- 
ister Germany as well As it turned out, the four-power administration of 
Germany lasted little more than a year. By 1949, the Western zones were 
merged into the Federal Republic, and the Russian zone became the 
German Democratic Republic. 

According to the four-power arrangement for Berlin, that city was not 
a part of Germany — East or West — but was officially under the rule of 
the four victorious Allies of World War II. The Soviets occupied a large 
sector in the eastern part of the city, the Americans had a sector in the 
south, and the British and French had theirs in the west and north. All of 
Berlin was now an island inside of what had become the German Demo- 
cratic Republic. As the years wore on, the East Germans and the Soviets 


568 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


found the three western sectors of Berlin to be a thorn in their side, a 
showcase of prosperity in the midst of the dismal grayness of the commu- 
nist bloc. Most important, West Berlin served as a conduit for those East 
Germans seeking to emigrate to the West: they would simply take the 
subway to one of the western sectors of the city, and then apply to 
emigrate. 

Amazingly, despite Berlin’s obvious four-power status, unambiguous 
arrangements for access to it had never been negotiated. Although the 
four powers had designated the various roads and air corridors to be 
used to reach Berlin, they had not explicitly agreed on the mechanisms 
of passage. In 1948, Stalin had tried to take advantage of this lacuna by 
instituting the Berlin blockade on the technical ground that the access 
routes were under repair. After one year of the Western airlift, access was 
restored, but the legal authority remained as vague as ever. 

In the years immediately following the blockade, Berlin grew into a 
major industrial center with needs which, in an emergency, could no 
longer have been met by an airlift. Although Berlin was still technically a 
four-power city and the Soviet Union was responsible for access, the East 
German satellite actually controlled the routes from its capital, East Ber- 
lin. Berlin’s position was therefore highly vulnerable. The road, rail, and 
air links were easy prey for interruptions so seemingly trivial that they 
were difficult to resist by force even though they might cumulatively 
threaten the freedom of the city. Theoretically, all military traffic was 
supposed to pass through a Soviet-controlled checkpoint, but this was a 
fiction; an East German guard controlled the gates, and Soviet officers 
lounged in a nearby shack in the event of disagreement. 

Small wonder that Khrushchev, looking around for a spot in which to 
demonstrate a permanent shift in the correlation of forces, decided to 
exploit Berlin’s vulnerability. In his memoirs, he noted: ‘To put it crudely, 
the American foot in Europe had a sore blister on it. That was West Berlin. 
Anytime we wanted to step on the Americans’ foot and make them feel 
the pain, all we had to do was obstruct Western communications with the 
city across the territory of the German Democratic Republic.” 1 

Khrushchev’s challenge to the West’s position in Berlin occurred at the 
precise moment when the democracies had convinced themselves once 
again that the incumbent General Secretary was their best hope for peace. 
Even so skeptical an observer of the Soviet scene as John Foster Dulles 
responded to Khrushchev’s speech to the Twentieth Party Congress in 
February 1956 by professing to have discerned a “notable shift” in Soviet 
policy. The Soviet rulers, he said, had concluded that “the time had come 
to change basically their approach to the non-Communist world Now 


569 



Diplomacy 


they pursue their foreign policy goals with less manifestation of intoler- 
ance and less emphasis on violence.” 2 By the same token, in September 
1957, less than one year after the crises in Suez and Hungary, Ambassador 
Llewellyn Thompson reported from Moscow that Khrushchev “really 
wants and is almost forced to a detente in relations with the West.” 3 

Khrushchev’s conduct did not support such optimism. When, in Octo- 
ber 1957, the Soviets launched the Sputnik, an artificial satellite, into an 
earth orbit, Khrushchev interpreted this essentially one-shot accomplish- 
ment as proof that the Soviet Union was outstripping the democracies in 
the scientific as well as the military field. Even in the West, the contention 
that a planned system might ultimately prove superior to a market econ- 
omy was beginning to gain credence. 

President Eisenhower stood nearly alone in his refusal to panic. As a 
military man, he understood the difference between a prototype and an 
operational military weapon. Khrushchev, on the other hand, taking his 
own boasts seriously, embarked on a protracted diplomatic offensive to 
translate the supposed superiority of Soviet missiles into some kind of 
diplomatic breakthrough. In January 1958, Khrushchev told a Danish jour- 
nalist: 

The launching of the Soviet sputniks first of all shows . . . that a serious 
change has occurred in the balance of forces between the countries of 
socialism and capitalism in favor of the socialist nations. 4 

In Khrushchev’s fantasy, the Soviet Union, besides being scientifically and 
militarily ahead of the United States, would soon exceed it in industrial 
output as well. On June 4, 1958, he told the Seventh Congress of the 
Bulgarian Communist Party: “We are firmly convinced that the time is 
approaching when socialist countries will outstrip the most developed 
capitalist countries not only in tempo but also in volume of industrial 
production.” 5 

As a devout communist, Khrushchev was practically required to seek 
to translate this presumed change in the balance of forces into diplomatic 
coin. Berlin was his first target. Khrushchev opened the challenge with 
three initiatives. On November 10, 1958, he delivered a speech de- 
manding an end to Berlin’s four-power status and warning that the Soviet 
Union intended to turn control of its access over to its East German 
satellite. From that day forward, Khrushchev vowed: “let the U.S.A., Britain 
and France build their own relations with the German Democratic Repub- 
lic and come to agreement with it if they are interested in any questions 
concerning Berlin.” 6 On November 27, Khrushchev transposed the es- 


570 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


sence of that speech into formal notes to the United States, Great Britain, 
and France declaring the Four-Power Agreement on Berlin null and void 
and insisting that West Berlin be transformed into a demilitarized “free 
city.” If no agreement was reached within six months, the Soviet Union 
would sign a peace treaty with East Germany and turn over its occupation 
rights and access routes to the German Democratic Republic. 7 Khru- 
shchev had delivered the equivalent of an ultimatum to the Western allies. 

On January 10, 1959, Khrushchev submitted to the other three occu- 
pying powers a draft peace treaty which defined the new status of both 
Berlin and East Germany. Later that month, Khrushchev spelled out the 
rationale for his policy before the Twenty-first Communist Party Congress. 
Like a confidence man selling his wares, he had in the meantime escalated 
his assessment of Soviet power even further, suggesting that, together 
with the People’s Republic of China, the Soviet Union was already pro- 
ducing half of the world’s industrial output; therefore, “the international 
situation will change radically.” 8 

Khrushchev had chosen the point of attack with great skill. The chal- 
lenge inherent in East German control of the access routes to Berlin was 
indirect. It confronted the democracies with the choice of recognizing 
the East German satellite or threatening to go to war over the technical 
issue of who was to stamp transit documents. Nevertheless, Khrushchev’s 
bluster, to which he was by nature inclined, masked a real weakness in 
the Soviets’ position. East Germany was losing manpower by the hun- 
dreds of thousands as its citizens, often its most talented professionals, 
fled to West Germany via Berlin. Berlin was turning out to be a gigantic 
hole in the Iron Curtain. If the trend continued, East Germany, a self- 
proclaimed “worker’s paradise,” would not have any workers left. 

The East German state was the most fragile link in the Soviet sphere of 
influence. Faced with the larger, more prosperous West Germany on its 
border, and recognized diplomatically only by its fellow Soviet satellite 
states, East Germany lacked legitimacy. The manpower drain through 
Berlin threatened its very survival. If something was not done, the leaders 
of East Berlin reasoned, the whole state could collapse in a matter of 
years. That would mean a devastating blow to the Soviet sphere of influ- 
ence, which Khrushchev was attempting to consolidate. By cutting off the 
escape route, Khrushchev hoped to give his East German satellite a new 
lease on life. And by forcing a Western retreat, he sought to weaken the 
Federal Republic’s Western ties. 

Khrushchev’s ultimatum went to the heart of Adenauer’s policy. For 
nearly a decade, Adenauer had rejected all the proposals to advance 
unification by sacrificing his Western ties. The Soviet Union had dangled 


571 



Diplomacy 


neutralism before the German public in Stalins peace plan of 1952, and 
Adenauer’s domestic opponents had supported it. Adenauer had staked 
his country’s future on the proposition that American and German inter- 
ests were identical. The tacit bargain was that the Federal Republic would 
join the Atlantic defense system and that the allies would make German 
unification an integral part of East-West diplomacy. Therefore, for Ade- 
nauer, the Berlin crisis was far more than a question of access procedures. 
It tested the very wisdom of the Federal Republic’s Western orientation. 

As far as Adenauer was concerned, there was simply no getting around 
the fact that every enhancement in the status of East Germany reinforced 
the Soviet claim that unification had to be left to negotiations directly 
between the two German states. At a time when the Social Democratic 
Party was still neutralist, such a de facto recognition by the allies of 
the German Democratic Republic would have revolutionized German 
domestic politics. According to de Gaulle, Adenauer told a Western sum- 
mit in December 1959: 

If Berlin were to be lost, my political position would at once become 
untenable. The Socialists would take over power in Bonn. They would 
proceed to make a direct arrangement with Moscow, and that would be 
the end of Europe. 9 

In Adenauer’s view, Khrushchev’s ultimatum had above all been designed 
to isolate the Federal Republic. The Soviet agenda for negotiations placed 
Bonn in a no-win situation. In return for any concessions it might make, 
the West would at best receive what it already had: access to Berlin. At the 
same time, the East German satellite would be given a veto on German 
unification which would lead either to a stalemate or to an outcome 
Adenauer described in his memoirs as follows: 


... we could not buy the reunification of Germany at the price of loos- 
ening Germany from the Western bloc and giving up the achievements 
of European integration. Because the result would be that a defenseless, 
unbound Germany in the middle of Europe would be created, that 
necessarily would be tempted to play off the East against the West. 10 


In short, Adenauer saw no benefit in any negotiation under the condi- 
tions outlined by Khrushchev. However, if negotiations proved unavoid- 
able, he wanted them to serve as proof of the wisdom of his reliance on 
the West. He strongly objected to responding to Khrushchev’s ultimatum 


572 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum- The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


with concessions, and he preferred that the West base its plans for unifi- 
cation on free elections. 

Adenauer’s views, however, were not shared by his Anglo-American 
allies, least of all by Great Britain. Prime Minister Harold Macmillan and 
the British people were reluctant to risk war over the capital of a defeated 
enemy that had, moreover, been largely responsible for destroying their 
nation’s pre-eminence as a Great Power. Unlike France, Great Britain did 
not identify its long-term security with the future of Germany. Twice in a 
generation, Great Britain had just barely been saved by American inter- 
vention from German assaults that had conquered most of Europe. 
Though Great Britain would have preferred to preserve the Atlantic Alli- 
ance, if forced to make a choice, it would risk isolation from Europe 
rather than separation from America. Adenauer’s domestic dilemmas con- 
cerned British leaders far less than Eisenhower’s did; in an ultimate crisis, 
the latter’s ability to command domestic support would have a far greater 
impact on Great Britain’s own survival. For all these reasons, British 
leaders refused to place any large bets on German unity, and interpreted 
Adenauer’s misgivings as nationalism masquerading behind legalistic 
pedantry. 

Pragmatists at heart, British leaders thought it was bizarre to risk nu- 
clear war over the transfer of authority from Soviet officials to their East 
German surrogates in the affixing of a transit stamp. In light of the horren- 
dous consequences of a nuclear war, the slogan “ Pourquoi mourirpour 
DanzigV (“Why die for Danzig?”), which had contributed to France’s 
demoralization in 1940, would surely have paled before the much more 
invidious slogan “Why die for a transit stamp?” 

Macmillan thus became a passionate proponent of negotiations — any 
negotiations — which might “improve” access procedures and would, at a 
minimum, waste time: “If all the Heads of State were swanning around 
each other’s territories, one could hardly believe that there would be a 
sudden and fatal explosion,” he later recalled. 11 

Of all the heads of the allies, Eisenhower bore the gravest burden of 
responsibility, because the decision to risk nuclear war ultimately rested 
on his shoulders. For the United States, the Berlin crisis brought home 
the realization that nuclear weapons, which throughout the decade of 
America’s nuclear monopoly and near-monopoly had seemed to provide 
a quick and relatively inexpensive path to security, would, in the age 
of approaching nuclear parity, increasingly circumscribe America’s will- 
ingness to run risks and thereby constrain its freedom of diplomatic 
maneuver. 

As long as America remained essentially immune from attack, nuclear 


573 



Diplomacy 


weapons gave it an advantage never previously enjoyed by any nation. As 
often happens, the most elaborate formulation of this advantage occurred 
at the moment when it was on the verge of disappearing. Near the end of 
the period of American nuclear monopoly, or near-monopoly, Dulles 
developed the concept of "massive retaliation” to deter Soviet aggression 
and to avoid protracted stalemates such as Korea in the future. Rather 
than resist aggression where it occurred, the United States would retaliate 
against the source of the trouble at a time and with weapons of its own 
choosing. However, the Soviet Union began developing its own thermo- 
nuclear weapons and intercontinental strategic missiles just as massive 
retaliation was being promulgated. The credibility of that strategy there- 
fore began to evaporate rather rapidly — even more quickly in perception 
than in reality. General nuclear war was a remedy simply out of propor- 
tion with most foreseeable crises, including the Berlin crisis. To be sure, 
the leaders of the democracies took Khrushchev’s wildly exaggerated 
claims of Soviet missile strength far too literally (with Eisenhower as the 
notable exception). But it was beyond dispute by 1958 that a general 
nuclear war would, in a matter of days, produce casualties that dwarfed 
the cumulative totals of both world wars. 

This stark equation produced a fundamental incompatibility between 
the kind of diplomacy required to make the threat of nuclear war credible 
and what was needed to rally democratic public opinion to confront the 
apocalyptic nature of the risk. Credibility in the face of Armageddon 
implied a hair-trigger reaction to challenges and a demonstration of reck- 
lessness so beyond normal calculation that no aggressor would ever dare 
to test it. But what the democratic public wanted, and was entitled to 
receive, was a calm, rational, calculating, and flexible diplomacy which 
would also cause the adversary to question America’s resolve to go to the 
extreme of general nuclear war. 

Early in the Berlin crisis, Eisenhower decided that it was more im- 
portant to calm the American public than to shock the Soviet leaders. In 
press conferences on February 18 and March 11, 1959, he advanced a 
number of propositions to defuse the nuclear threat which underlay 
American strategy. "We are certainly not going to fight a ground war in 
Europe,” 12 he said, and specifically placed the defense of Berlin into that 
category. It was unlikely, he avowed, that the United States would "shoot 
our way into Berlin.” 13 In order to leave no loophole, he excluded de- 
fending Berlin with nuclear weapons as well: "I don’t know how you 
could free anything with nuclear weapons.” 14 These statements surely 
conveyed the impression that America’s willingness to risk war over Ber- 
lin was very limited. 


574 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum. The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


The mildness of Eisenhower’s reaction was due in part to his assess- 
ment of Khrushchev, whom he still considered, together with most other 
American leaders, the West’s best hope for peace. Khrushchev’s ultima- 
tum over Berlin had not changed Ambassador Thompson’s views of two 
years earlier. On March 9, 1959, Thompson reiterated his impression 
that Khrushchev’s principal concerns were domestic. According to the 
Ambassador, brinkmanship was Khrushchevs way of developing a pattern 
of coexistence that would serve as the prerequisite to economic reform 
and domestic liberalization. 15 How the threat of war established a pattern 
of coexistence was not explained. 

Such analyses made no impression on the other member of the inter- 
national quartet — French President Charles de Gaulle, who had just 
returned to office after twelve years in the political wilderness. He 
did not agree with the Anglo-American analysis of Khrushchev’s motiva- 
tions and was determined that the Berlin crisis should demonstrate to 
Adenauer that France was the Federal Republic’s indispensable partner. 
He was more afraid of the danger of reawakening German national- 
ism than of Khrushchev’s threats. At a minimum, he wanted to provide 
Adenauer with an anchor in the West; if possible, he would seek to 
enlist a disillusioned Adenauer in a European structure less dominated 
by America. 

Whereas Eisenhower and Macmillan tried to find some Soviet demand 
that might be satisfied with little or no long-term damage, de Gaulle was 
adamantly opposed to such a strategy. He rejected the "exploratory talks” 
being urged by his Anglo-American partners because he saw nothing of 
any benefit to the West available for exploration. He disdained the 
schemes for a change in procedures that were being elaborated in Wash- 
ington and London with the argument that they might "improve” access. 
Khrushchev, after all, had not issued his ultimatum in order to improve 
the West’s access. In de Gaulle’s opinion, the challenge had its origin 
in the Soviet domestic structure, not in any specific Soviet grievance. 
Eisenhower understood that the Soviet Union was militarily inferior; de 
Gaulle went a step further and ascribed Khrushchev’s ultimatum to an 
inherently flawed, fragile, and vastly inferior political system: 


. . . there is in this uproar of imprecations and demands organized by 
the Soviets something so arbitrary and so artificial that one is led to 
attribute it either to the premeditated unleashing of frantic ambitions, 
or to the desire of drawing attention away from great difficulties: this 
second hypothesis seems all the more plausible to me since, despite 
the coercions, isolation and acts of force in which the Communist 


575 



Diplomacy 


system encloses the countries which are under its yoke . . . actually its 
gaps, its shortages, its internal failures, and above that its character of 
inhuman oppression, are felt more and more by the elites and the 
masses, whom it is more and more difficult to deceive and to subju- 
gate. 16 


Soviet military power was therefore a fagade designed to obscure the 
endless internal struggles inherent in the Soviet system: 


... in their camps the struggle between political trends, the intrigues of 
clans, the rivalries of individuals periodically lead to implacable crises, 
whose sequels — or even whose premonitory symptoms — cannot help 
but unsettle them. . . , 17 


Yielding to Soviet pressure would merely encourage Khrushchev to step 
up his foreign adventures as a way of deflecting attention from the funda- 
mental internal crisis of his system, and it might make Germany . . seek 
in the East a future which she despairs of being guaranteed in the West.” 18 

De Gaulle could well afford such clear-sighted intransigence because, 
unlike the American President, he did not bear the ultimate responsibility 
for initiating a nuclear war. When push came to shove, it is extremely 
doubtful that de Gaulle would have been more prepared to risk nuclear 
war than Eisenhower and, given the vulnerability of his country, he proba- 
bly would have been less so. Yet, precisely because he was convinced 
that the principal danger of war was Western irresolution and that 
America was the only nation capable of deterring the Soviets, de Gaulle 
felt free to maneuver in ways that would oblige America to stand firm or 
to assume responsibility for whatever concessions might have to be made. 
It was not a pretty game, but raison d'etat teaches hard lessons. And it 
was on the basis of raison d'etat that de Gaulle reversed the Richelieu 
tradition of attempting to keep Germany weak and fragmented, which 
had been the essence of French Central European policy for 300 years. 

De Gaulle had not arrived at his devotion to Franco-German friendship 
in a sudden fit of sentimentality. Since the time of Richelieu, French 
policy had been aimed at keeping the ominous German neighbor either 
divided or weak, preferably both. In the nineteenth century, France 
learned that it lacked the power to contain Germany by itself; alliances 
with Great Britain, Russia, and a host of smaller countries were the conse- 
quence. In the aftermath of the Second World War, even those options 
were disappearing. Great Britain and France combined had not been 


576 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum. The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


strong enough to defeat Germany in the two world wars. And with Soviet 
armies along the Elbe and East Germany a Soviet satellite, alliance with 
Moscow was more likely to result in Soviet domination of Europe than in 
the containment of Germany. This was why de Gaulle abandoned the 
traditional adversarial relationship with Germany and entrusted France’s 
future to friendship with the hereditary enemy. 

The Berlin crisis provided de Gaulle with an opportunity to advance 
his strategy. He carefully positioned France in the role of defender of the 
European identity and used the Berlin crisis to demonstrate France’s 
understanding of European realities and its sensitivity to German national 
concerns. De Gaulle’s was a complex approach that required the subtlest 
of balancing acts between showing support for German national goals 
and not encouraging the Germans to pursue them on their own or in 
collusion with the Soviet Union. De Gaulle had come to fear that Mos- 
cow’s stranglehold on East Germany might enable Soviet leaders to 
emerge as the champions of German unity or to establish a free-floating 
Germany along the French frontier. France’s age-old German nightmare 
had turned into the nightmare of a possible German-Soviet deal. 

De Gaulle responded with characteristic boldness. France would con- 
cede German military and economic power, even its pre-eminence in 
these fields, and would support German unification in exchange for 
Bonn’s recognition of France as the political leader of Europe. It was a 
cold calculation, not a great passion; de Gaulle surely did not die unful- 
filled because Germany was not reunited in his lifetime. 

Seeking to strike a balance between de Gaulle’s flamboyant intransi- 
gence and Macmillan’s quest for demonstrative negotiations, Dulles re- 
sorted to his familiar tactic of confusing the issue by submerging it in 
legalistic detail, which, to his way of thinking, had served him so well 
during the Suez crisis. On November 24, 1958, two weeks after Khru- 
shchev’s menacing speech, Dulles began exploring options on changing 
access procedures without actually yielding on substance. He wrote to 
Adenauer that he would try to “hold the Soviet Union to its obligations” 
while simultaneously dealing “on a de facto basis with minor [GDR] 
functionaries, so long as they merely carried out perfunctorily the present 
arrangements.” 19 At a press conference on November 26, Dulles put for- 
ward the notion that East German officials might act as “agents” for the 
Soviet Union — a ploy reminiscent of his Users’ Association from the days 
of the Suez crisis (see chapter 21 ). 20 

At a press conference on January 13, 1959, Dulles went a step further 
and signaled a change in America’s historic position on German unifica- 
tion. After arguing that free elections were the “natural method” for 


577 



Diplomacy 


unifying Germany, he added, “I wouldn’t say that it is the only method by 
which reunification could be accomplished.” 21 He even hinted that some 
sort of confederation of the two German states might prove acceptable: 
“There are all kinds of methods whereby countries and peoples draw 

together ” 22 He strongly implied that responsibility for unification 

might be transferred from the allies to the Germans themselves, under- 
cutting the essence of Adenauers policy. 

The German reaction was predictable, though no one had predicted it. 
Willy Brandt, then Lord Mayor of Berlin, expressed his “shock and dis- 
may” Dulles’ agent theory, Brandt said, would encourage the Soviets to 
adopt an even more “uncompromising” stance. 23 

Truculence was not Adenauer’s normal style. He also greatly admired 
Dulles. Nevertheless, he reacted to Dulles’ musings much as Eden had 
during Suez. In a conversation with Ambassador David Bruce, Adenauer 
argued emotionally that Dulles’ statements were undermining his govern- 
ment’s policy, which had sought unification through the West and on the 
basis of free elections. “. . . [Confederation in any form,” he insisted, 
would be “totally unacceptable.” 24 

The difference in perspectives became painfully apparent in mid-Janu- 
ary 1959, when Adenauer sent the permanent Undersecretary for Political 
Affairs of the Foreign Ministry, Herbert Dittmann, to Washington to ex- 
press “shock” at the Soviets’ proposal for a German peace treaty, and 
to urge a negotiating position based on the West’s established policy. 
Dittmann’s counterpart, United States Undersecretary of State Livingston 
Merchant, made it clear that, in this crisis, Adenauer could not count on 
Dulles’ customary all-out support. Dulles, he argued, wanted to avoid any 
“extreme position,” and “to get the Russians to the conference table.” 
The Germans could best contribute by “providing] us with new ideas.” 25 
As the crisis developed, whenever America and Great Britain asked for 
“new ideas,” they were putting forth a euphemism for enhancing the 
status of the East German regime or for finding a formula to meet some 
Soviet demand. 

It was ironic that Great Britain and the United States should be urging 
Germany onto a course that would almost certainly lead to greater Ger- 
man nationalism, while Adenauer, having far less confidence in his own 
countrymen, remained determined not to expose them to that tempta- 
tion. Eisenhower and Macmillan were placing their faith in the Germans’ 
conversion; Adenauer could not forget their original sin. 

Macmillan was the first to break ranks. On February 21, 1959, he jour- 
neyed on his own to Moscow for “exploratory talks.” Since Adenauer 
disapproved of the whole enterprise and no allied consensus existed, 


578 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


Macmillan’s “exploration” of what concessions might be offered must 
have included the already familiar catalogue of “improvements” in access 
procedures, along with his customary appeal for peace based on personal 
relations among world leaders. 

Khrushchev interpreted Macmillan’s visit as another confirmation of a 
favorable tilt in the balance of forces and the augury of even better things 
to come. During Macmillan’s visit, Khrushchev delivered a boisterous 
speech reaffirming his demands in an uncompromising fashion. In an- 
other speech after the Prime Minister’s departure, he dismissed Macmil- 
lan’s proposition that good personal relations among world leaders 
would ease the road to peace: “History teaches that it is not conferences 
that change borders of states. The decisions of conferences can only 
reflea the new alignment of forces. And this is the result of victory or 
surrender at the end of a war, or of other circumstances.” 26 It was a bald- 
faced profession of Realpolitik that might well have come from the mouth 
of Richelieu or Bismarck. 

After Adenauer’s blow-up, Dulles pulled back. On January 29, he aban- 
doned the “agent theory” and stopped hinting at confederation as the 
route to German unity. Dulles’ retreat, however, was largely tactical. Con- 
victions had not altered, nor had personalities. As during the Suez crisis 
two years earlier, American policy depended on reconciling the subtle 
nuances of difference between the approaches of Eisenhower and Dulles. 
Given his own analysis of the Soviet system, Dulles in all likelihood 
understood Adenauer’s point of view and must have shared much of it. 
But, as before, Dulles had to figure out how to relate his strategy to the 
much more elemental approach of Eisenhower. 

For, after all was said and done, most of the issues that concerned 
Adenauer struck Eisenhower as theoretical, if not irrelevant. It was indeed 
fortunate that Khrushchev was not privy to Eisenhower’s personal rumi- 
nations. As early as November 27, 1958 — the day of Khrushchev’s formal 
ultimatum — Eisenhower indicated in a telephone conversation with Dul- 
les that he was receptive to the idea of a free city without American 
troops, provided that both Berlin and its access routes were under United 
Nations jurisdiction. 

When presidential advisers or cabinet members disagree with their 
chief, they have to decide whether to make their case while the disagree- 
ment is still largely theoretical or to wait for the moment of actual deci- 
sion. The answer determines future influence because presidents are 
generally personalities of strong will that can be crossed only so often. 
If advisers choose to challenge hypothetical cases, they may generate 
unnecessary acrimony since the president may change his mind on his 


579 



Diplomacy 


own. On the other hand, if they wait on events, they run the risk of being 
stampeded. Dulles opted for a middle ground. Warning Eisenhower 
against “paper agreements,” he cautioned that keeping Berlin free re- 
quired the presence of American troops. 27 As it turned out, the occasion 
for an actual decision never arose. By this time, Dulles was terminally ill, 
and six months later, on May 24, 1959, he died. 

On July 1, Eisenhower returned to his theme of accommodation. In a 
meeting with Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Frol Kozlov, he responded to 
the Soviet complaint that America's position with respect to Berlin was 
illogical. “We admit it is illogical, but we will not abandon our rights and 
responsibilities — unless there is a way made for us to do so.” 28 Main- 
taining one’s rights until a way can be arranged to abandon them is hardly 
a stirring battle cry. 

At Camp David in September 1959, Eisenhower told Khrushchev that 
America had no intention of staying in Berlin forever. “Clearly,” he said, 
“we did not contemplate 50 years in occupation there ” 29 Purporting to 
risk nuclear war on behalf of a city one is looking forward to vacating is 
not a great battle cry either. 

On September 28, Eisenhower went even further, in essence conced- 
ing the basic premise of the Soviet challenge — that the situation in Berlin 
was indeed “abnormal”: 

It was brought about by a truce, a military truce, after the end of the 
war, an armistice, and it put strangely a few — or a number of free 
people in a very awkward position. 30 

What might have happened had Khrushchev either pressed the Soviet 
challenge or formulated some “compromise” based on the numer- 
ous hints he was receiving is painful to contemplate. Fortunately, Khru- 
shchev’s limited attention span, his misassessment of his own relative 
strength, and perhaps divisions within the Soviet leadership all conspired 
to impart an oddly inconclusive quality to Soviet conduct. Khrushchev’s 
ultimatums alternated with lulls during which deadlines came and went 
without the Soviet leader ever insisting on the fulfillment of his demands 
or on a negotiation. The former would have revealed how determined 
the allies really were; the latter would have tested the obvious willingness 
of at least Great Britain and the United States to modify access to Berlin 
and the city’s status. Khrushchev’s failure to stick to his objective spared 
the Atlantic Alliance what might have turned into its greatest crisis. 

Khrushchev pursued neither confrontation nor negotiation consis- 
tently. That alone should have raised a doubt in Western minds about the 


580 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum. The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


coherence of the Soviet system. To threaten nuclear war and challenge 
the European status quo without developing a strategy leading to at least 
a diplomatic showdown proved to be a foretaste of the paralysis that 
would grip the Soviet system some twenty years later. Khrushchev was 
apparently trapped between the “hawks” in his Politburo, who, believing 
his boasts about a tilt in the balance of power, thought that the West was 
not offering enough, and the “doves,” who, aware of the actual military 
realities, were unwilling to run even the slightest risk of war with the 
United States. 

In the midst of this strange process, Khrushchev permitted his first 
ultimatum to lapse without having anything more to show for it than a 
foreign ministers’ conference two weeks before the expiration of the 
deadline. That meeting failed to make progress because Andrei Gromyko, 
who had recently been appointed as Foreign Minister, used the occasion 
to burnish his formidable skill at stonewalling, with which he was to 
torment the democracies’ foreign ministers for a whole generation. In 
fact, deadlock was not what the Soviets needed as the ultimatum was 
expiring. It did, however, enable Eisenhower to gain some more time, by 
inviting Khrushchev to visit the United States. 

The Soviet ruler toured the United States from September 15 to Sep- 
tember 27, 1959, eliciting the same sort of euphoric public reaction that 
had been evoked by the Geneva Summit four years earlier. Once again, 
the meeting of the two heads of government emphasized atmosphere 
over substance, as symbolized by the slogan “the spirit of Camp David.” 
Newsweek magazine published a scorecard which indicated that the visit’s 
purported achievements by far outnumbered its failures. And whatever 
failures there were, it was said, concerned primarily the leaders’ inability 
to make progress on the issue of Berlin — as if that were a minor matter. 
The list of achievements included cultural exchanges, increased trade, 
and greater scientific cooperation, none of which required a meeting of 
the heads of government. The most frequently cited benefit was what the 
Soviet leader was presumed to be learning about his hosts, which re- 
flected the standard American belief that conflicts among nations are 
caused by misunderstanding rather than by clashing interests, and that no 
one could ever come, see, and leave America and still be hostile to its 
ways. 

According to a Newsweek poll, Americans believed that Khrushchev 
had finally understood “that Americans from the President on down genu- 
inely want peace.” 31 If that was Khrushchev’s actual judgment, the effect 
was surely double-edged. In any event, he kept that particular insight a 
state secret. Speaking a few weeks later, in early December, Khrushchev 


581 



Diplomacy 


boasted that “the capitalist world is shaking under the blows of the Social- 
ist camp We have the will to win.” 32 

Eisenhower too emerged from the summit with much the same convic- 
tion with which he had entered it: he remained willing, if not eager, to 
change the status of Berlin. At the end of the Summit, on October 1, 
Eisenhower described his idea of an appropriate way out of the crisis to 
his National Security Adviser, Gordon Gray: 

We must remember that Berlin is an abnormal situation; that we had 
found it necessaiy to live with it, and that it had come about through 
some mistakes of our leaders — Churchill and Roosevelt. However, he 
[Eisenhower] felt that there must be some way to develop some kind of 
a free city which might be somehow a part of West Germany, which 
might require that the U.N. would become a party to guaranteeing the 
freedom, safety and security of the city which would have an unarmed 
status except for police forces. He reiterated that the time was coming 
and perhaps soon when we would simply have to get our forces out. 33 


With Khrushchev fortunately unwilling to explore these or any other 
ideas, the Western allies achieved by default their principal objective of 
gaining time. In 1955, the Geneva Summit had permitted Khrushchev to 
achieve a relaxation of tensions without making substantive concessions; 
in 1959, Eisenhower achieved the same result by invoking the so-called 
spirit of Camp David. 

The principal result of Camp David was another delay. Eisenhower and 
Khrushchev agreed to convene a meeting of the four powers occupying 
Berlin. But Eisenhower wanted first to consult his allies. De Gaulle re- 
fused the summit invitation unless Khrushchev first paid a state visit to 
Paris. Given all these preconditions, the earliest date for a summit turned 
out to be May I960, to be held in Paris. Finally, two weeks before the 
meeting, an American U-2 spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union. 
That flight gave Khrushchev the pretext to wreck the entire conference, 
which by then had already been over a year in gestation. It turned out to 
be just as well, since the American fallback position on Berlin had been a 
plan for a “guaranteed city,” which incorporated many of Eisenhowers 
ruminations to Gordon Gray. In practice, the scheme differed from 
Khrushchev’s free-city proposal primarily in the label accorded to the 
city’s new status. 

Although for several days the Western allies were concerned that 
Khrushchev might finally have his pretext for a showdown, it very quickly 
became apparent that the Soviet leader was seeking just the opposite — a 


582 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


pretext for avoiding a showdown. Verbal truculence became a substitute 
for the confrontation Khrushchev had threatened just as consistently as 
he had recoiled from it. Contrary to all expectations, when Khrushchev 
stopped in Berlin on his way back from the aborted Paris summit, he 
announced yet another postponement of his deadline, this time until after 
the American presidential elections. 

By the time John F. Kennedy entered office, nearly three years had 
passed since Khrushchev had issued his first ultimatum. The passage of 
time had progressively reduced the credibility of his threat and the over- 
all sense of danger. Just when the Berlin issue seemed to be calming 
down, the Kennedy Administration’s failed attempt to overthrow Castro 
at the Bay of Pigs and its indecisiveness over Laos apparently convinced 
Khrushchev that Kennedy was a soft touch. At a summit with Kennedy 
in Vienna in early June 1961, Khrushchev reinstated another six-month 
deadline, inaugurating one of the most intense periods of confrontation 
of the entire Cold War. 

Reporting on the summit on June 15, Khrushchev told the world that 
the conclusion of a German peace treaty could no longer be delayed: “A 
peace settlement in Europe must be attained this year.” For one of his 
speeches, Khrushchev appeared in the uniform of a lieutenant general, a 
courtesy rank Stalin had bestowed on him during the war. On another 
occasion, Khrushchev told the British Ambassador that it would take only 
six atomic bombs to destroy England and nine to obliterate France. 34 In 
September I960, Khrushchev ended the informal nuclear test ban which 
both sides had observed for three years. As part of its test program, the 
Soviet Union set off a monstrous explosion of fifty megatons. 

Khrushchev’s demands for a postwar settlement were not new. 
Churchill had urged a postwar settlement as early as 1943; Stalin had 
proposed one in his 1952 Peace Note; George Kennan had advocated a 
settlement on Germany in the mid-1950s. But unlike other wars, there 
was to be no postwar settlement following the Second World War. The 
American and Soviet spheres of influence would be established step by 
step and by acquiescence to faits accomplis rather than by formal 
agreements. 

The final act in defining the European spheres of influence began in 
the early hours of August 13, 1961. West Berliners awoke to find them- 
selves virtually imprisoned. The East Germans had erected barbed-wire 
barricades between the Soviet sector of Berlin and the sectors occupied 
by the three Western powers, and had built a fence around the entire city 
of Berlin. Families on opposite sides of that wall were rent asunder. As 
the days went by, the wall was reinforced; concrete, land mines, and 


583 



Diplomacy 


guard dogs became the symbols of the divided city and of communist 
inhumanity. The bankruptcy of a communist regime unable to induce its 
own citizens to remain within their country was revealed to all the world. 
Nevertheless, the communist leaders had plugged the hole in the dike of 
the Soviet bloc — at least temporarily. 

The erection of the wall brought home to the democracies their Berlin 
dilemma. They were prepared to defend the freedom of Berlin against 
overt aggression, but they had not decided on their response below that 
threshold or, indeed, on how to define aggression. Almost immediately, 
Kennedy determined that the construction of the wall did not fit America’s 
definition of aggression and decided not to challenge it militarily. The 
American attempt to play down the building of the wall was shown by the 
fact that, on the day it was first erected, Kennedy went sailing and Secre- 
tary of State Rusk attended a baseball game. There was no crisis atmo- 
sphere in Washington. 

In truth, Kennedy’s military options were quite limited. If American 
troops removed the barrier at the sector border, they might face a rebuilt 
wall a few hundred yards farther back. Would they then enter East Berlin 
to tear it down? Would the Western public support a war for the cause of 
free movement inside Berlin — when in practice East Berlin had been 
conceded long before as the capital of the East German communist satel- 
lite? 

As it became clear that America would not resist the building of the 
wall by force, West Berlin and the Federal Republic experienced the kind 
of shock that comes from being confronted with a reality of which one 
was subconsciously aware but afraid to acknowledge. At the latest after 
the Hungarian Revolution, it should have been clear that the West would 
not challenge the existing spheres of influence militarily. Brandt was to 
claim later that his policy of Ostpolitik, which led to the recognition of 
the East German regime, resulted from his disillusionment with America’s 
reaction to the building of the wall. In all likelihood, however, the Ger- 
mans’ shock would have been even greater had a war resulted from the 
effort to tear it down. Even Adenauer told Acheson that he did not want 
Berlin defended by a nuclear war, knowing full well that there was no 
other means by which it could be defended. 

Both superpowers continued to jockey in an effort to define both their 
commitment and its limits. In July, Kennedy substantially increased the 
American defense budget, called up reserves, and sent additional forces 
to Europe. In August 1961, after the wall was built, Kennedy dispatched 
1,500 troops on the Autobahn through the Soviet zone, daring the Soviets 
to stop them. Arriving without challenge, the troops were met with a 


584 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


rousing speech by Vice-President Johnson, who had flown ahead to greet 
them. Soon thereafter, General Lucius Clay, the hero of the Berlin block- 
ade of 1948, was appointed as the Presidents personal representative 
in Berlin. Kennedy was staking American credibility on the freedom of 
Berlin. 

Khrushchev had again maneuvered himself into the same sort of dead 
end as during the Eisenhower Administration. His bluster had evoked an 
American reaction he proved unwilling to challenge. And reports from 
Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, the extraordinary American mole in Soviet mili- 
tary intelligence, revealed that high-level Soviet officers were quite well 
aware of their lack of preparedness and frequently grumbled amongst 
themselves about Khrushchevs recklessness. 35 As early as I960, Eisen- 
hower had seen through Khrushchev s bluff, telling a visitor that, in the 
event of war, he would be far more worried about nuclear fallout from 
America's own weapons than about Soviet retaliation. Once he became 
President, Kennedy also quickly realized that the Soviet Union was infe- 
rior in overall strategic power. 

This state of affairs favored the side wanting to preserve the status quo. 
At the same time, Kennedy was even more explicit than Eisenhower had 
been about his reluctance to run even a slight risk of nuclear war over 
Berlin. On the way back from his summit with Khrushchev at Vienna, he 
ruminated: 

... it seems particularly stupid to risk killing a million Americans over 
an argument about access rights on an Autobahn ... or because the 
Germans rant Germany reunified. If I’m going to threaten Russia with 
a nuclear war, it will have to be for much bigger and more important 
reasons than that. 36 

Eisenhower’s strategy had been drawn from the original containment 
script. He strove to block the Soviets wherever they challenged the West. 
Kennedy’s goals were more ambitious. He hoped to end the Soviet-Amer- 
ican conflict once and for all through direct superpower negotiations — 
and to use the Berlin crisis as the turning point. The Kennedy White 
House therefore pressed for a more flexible diplomacy on Berlin and, if 
necessary, a unilateral one. To Eisenhower, Berlin had been a challenge 
to be endured and outlasted; to Kennedy, it was a way station on the road 
to his design of a new world order. Eisenhower or Dulles would come 
up with formulae to defuse a specific threat; Kennedy wanted to eliminate 
a permanent obstacle to peace. 

The two presidents’ attitudes toward NATO differed as well. Whereas 


585 



Diplomacy 


Eisenhower had commanded the wartime alliance in Europe, Kennedy 
had been involved with the war in the Pacific, where the American effort 
had been much more national and unilateral. Kennedy was not prepared 
to grant allies a veto over negotiations and, in truth, preferred to deal 
directly with the Soviet Union, as can be seen from this presidential 
directive to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, dated August 21, 1961, a week 
after the Berlin Wall went up: 

Both the calendar of negotiation and the substance of the Western 
position remain unsettled, and I no longer believe that satisfactory’ 
progress can be made by Four-Power discussion alone. I think we 
should promptly work toward a strong U.S. position in both areas and 
should make it clear that we cannot accept a veto from any other power. 

. . . We should this week make it plain to our three Allies that this is 
what we mean to do and that they must come along or stay behind . 37 

In pursuit of this directive, Dean Rusk abandoned four-power negotia- 
tions in favor of a direct dialogue with Moscow. Rusk and Gromyko met 
a few times that fall at the United Nations. Other conversations took 
place between Ambassador Thompson and Gromyko in Moscow. Yet the 
Soviets would not so much as agree to an agenda for negotiations on the 
Berlin issue. 

The trouble was that each side found itself trapped in a dilemma pecu- 
liar to the Nuclear Age. They could use their nuclear forces to protect 
their survival, but these weapons did not lend themselves to bringing 
about positive transformations. Whatever theoretical level of superiority 
might be calculated, the risk of nuclear war was out of proportion to any 
objective to be gained. Even a 5 percent risk of war is intolerable when 
the penalty involves the utter destruction of one’s society — indeed, of 
civilization. At the end of the day, therefore, each side recoiled before the 
risk of war. 

At the same time, neither side was in a position to substitute diplomacy 
for power. Despite the mounting tension, the arguments in favor of the 
status quo always seemed to outweigh the impulse to modify it. On the 
side of the democracies, an allied consensus proved impossible to 
achieve; on the communist side, Khrushchev’s boasting may have raised 
the expectations of his colleagues to such an extent that even the major 
concessions the West was prepared to make seemed inadequate to the 
Kremlin hard-liners. In the end, Khrushchev tried to break the deadlock 
by his disastrous adventure of placing missiles into Cuba, which showed 
just how high the stakes had to be raised before military power could 
affect diplomacy. 


586 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


These tendencies toward stagnation doomed the efforts of the Kennedy 
Administration to break the deadlock with diplomatic initiatives. Any con- 
cession conceivably acceptable to Khrushchev would weaken the Atlantic 
Alliance, and any settlement tolerable to the democracies would weaken 
Khrushchev. 

The Kennedy Administration's effort to discover in the Soviet catalogue 
of demands any that could be met without risk was doomed to failure. On 
August 28, 1961, McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy’s National Security Adviser, 
summed up White House thinking in a memorandum to the President: 
“The main line of thought among those who are now at work on the 
substance of our negotiating position is that we can and should shift 
substantially toward acceptance of the GDR, the Oder-Neisse line, a 
non-aggression pact, and even the idea of two peace treaties.” 38 The 
memorandum did not state what the United States expected to receive in 
return. 

Such attitudes made it inevitable that Washington would gradually sepa- 
rate itself from Adenauer. On September 22, an Administration leak had 
stated pointedly: 

An authoritative United States source called on West Germany today to 
accept, in its own interests, the “reality” of the existence of two German 
states. 

The source said West Germany would have better chances of achiev- 
ing German reunification “by talking to the East Germans” instead of 
ignoring them. 39 

In December 1961, Bundy tried to reassure Bonn by referring to the 
“fundamental” American purpose of ensuring that the German people 
“shall not have any legitimate cause to regret their trust in us.” At the 
same time, he warned against misinterpreting that reassurance to be a 
blank check: “We cannot grant — and no German statesmen have asked — 
a German veto on the policy of the West. A partnership of free men can 
never move at the call of one member only.” 40 

In effect, these conciliatory phrases canceled each other out. Since the 
stated American and German positions were irreconcilable, and since 
Germany was totally dependent on the United States for the defense of 
Berlin, denying Bonn a veto could produce only one of two outcomes: 
risking war for a cause in which the Kennedy Administration had said it 
did not believe, or imposing views on Bonn that had been rejected by 
the German leaders. The former course could not have been sustained 
in the American Congress or in public opinion; the latter would have 


587 



Diplomacy 


wrecked Germany’s commitment to the West and the cohesion of the 
Atlantic Alliance. 

Relations between Washington and Bonn grew progressively more 
testy. Fearing deadlock and a break with Adenauer, the State Department 
dragged its feet for several months and did not implement Kennedy’s 
directive to push direct negotiations with Moscow — or rather it held 
meetings without providing many new ideas. Had Khrushchev possessed 
a sense of proportion, he might have realized that this was the moment 
to determine which of all the various Western hints might be translated 
into hard political coin. Instead, he kept raising the stakes and avoided 
negotiations. 

During this period of suspended diplomacy and inter-allied tension, I 
was peripherally involved in White House policymaking as a consultant 
to the National Security Council. Although I was aware of the issues being 
debated and the various crosscurrents swirling around the President, I 
did not personally participate in the final decisions. NATO traditionalists 
— in particular Acheson, who functioned as an outside consultant during 
those intervals in which his acerbic tongue had not caused him to fall out 
of favor — were loath to negotiate at all. Like de Gaulle and Adenauer, 
they could see no conceivable improvement in any new access proce- 
dures, and expected only acrimony from attempts to negotiate on the 
issue of German unification. 

As much as I admired Acheson, I did not believe that a strategy of 
stonewalling could be sustained. Whenever Khrushchev chose, he could 
force a negotiation; no Western leader, not even de Gaulle, could con- 
front his public with the need for a showdown unless he had first demon- 
strated that he had explored every means to avoid one. Considering it 
dangerous to negotiate on the basis of a Soviet agenda, I thought it was 
vital to pre-empt this by coming up with an American plan for the future 
of Germany. I feared for the cohesion of the allies if decisions were 
relegated to a conference or left at the mercy of deadlines. On procedure, 
I favored negotiation; on substance, I was close to the traditional positions 
of Adenauer and Acheson. 

My brief White House stint during the Kennedy years produced a num- 
ber of encounters with Adenauer. These painfully served to bring home 
to me the extent of the distrust which the Berlin crisis had engendered 
between heretofore close allies. In 1958, shortly after the publication of 
my book Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy ; 41 Adenauer had invited 
me to call on him, though I was then a relatively unknown junior profes- 
sor. During that conversation, Adenauer told me emphatically not to be 
deceived by the appearance of a monolithic communist bloc extending 
from the Baltic to Southeast Asia: as far as he was concerned, a break 


588 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


between China and the Soviet Union was inevitable. He hoped, he said, 
that when it occurred the democracies would be ready to take advantage 
of it. 

I had never heard that proposition before, nor did I believe it. Ade- 
nauer must have interpreted my amazed silence as acquiescence, for 
when he met Kennedy three years later, he concluded a peroration on 
the inevitability of a Sino-Soviet split by mentioning that I concurred with 
him. A little later, I received a message from Kennedy to the effect that he 
would be grateful if, henceforth, I would share my geopolitical insights 
not just with the German Chancellor but with him as well. 

Assuming — perhaps as a result of this exchange between Adenauer 
and Kennedy — that I was closer to Adenauer than was probably the case, 
the White House asked me early in 1962 to attempt to ease the Chan- 
cellor’s increasingly vocal concerns about the Kennedy Administration’s 
Berlin policy. I was to brief Adenauer on the American approach to 
negotiations, military-contingency planning for Berlin, and, as a special 
consideration, America’s nuclear capability, which, I was told, had never 
been shared with any ally except Great Britain. 

It proved to be a formidable task. I had barely begun my presentation 
when Adenauer interrupted: “They have already told me this in Washing- 
ton. It did not impress me there; why do they think it would impress me 
here?” I replied sharply that I was not a government employee, that I had 
been asked to call on him in order to ease his concerns, and that he 
should hear me out before drawing conclusions. 

Adenauer was nonplussed. He asked how much of my time was spent 
working as a White House consultant. When I told him about 25 percent, 
he replied calmly: “In that case, I shall assume you are telling me 75 
percent of the truth ” This was uttered in the presence of the American 
Ambassador, Walter C. Dowling, who, according to Adenauer’s formula, 
would have to have been lying all the time. 

But even at that low point in German -American relations, Adenauer 
demonstrated that, for him, reliability was a moral imperative. Though 
nuclear strategy was not his consuming field of interest, he deeply ap- 
preciated the sign of confidence implicit in the nuclear briefing Washing- 
ton had conveyed to him through me. Having emigrated from Germany 
at the age of fifteen some twenty-five years earlier, I did not feel my 
German vocabulary was equal to a discussion of nuclear weapons, and 
conducted my part of the conversation in English. Our interpreter was a 
member of the Chancellor’s staff. Twenty-five years later, that official, who 
by then was quite elderly and in retirement, wrote to me to say that, like 
any interpreter worth his salt, he had made a record of the nuclear 
briefing and had presented it to Adenauer. The Chancellor’s response was 


589 



Diplomacy 


that he had given his word that the briefing would be kept confidential; 
therefore, retaining even a single file copy would be incompatible with 
that promise. And he ordered that all records relating to that part of our 
conversation be destroyed. 

Nevertheless, by April 1962, German-American relations had spun out 
of control. On April 21, an American plan was leaked calling for the 
creation of an International Access Authority to control traffic in and out 
of Berlin. It was to consist of five Western parties (the three Western 
occupying powers plus the Federal Republic and West Berlin), five com- 
munist participants (the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, the Ger- 
man Democratic Republic, and East Berlin), and three neutrals (Sweden, 
Switzerland, and Austria). Unification would be promoted by a number 
of committees composed in equal parts of West and East German officials. 

Not surprisingly, Adenauer was adamantly opposed to creating an Ac- 
cess Authority especially if East and West Germany would have equal 
status in it. Moreover, participation of representatives from both East and 
West Berlin would weaken the city’s already fragile four-power status and 
further enhance the role of East Germany. Since the number of commu- 
nists on the Access Authority equaled the number of representatives of 
the democracies, three weak, neutral countries subject to Soviet blackmail 
would have the decisive voice. Adenauer considered all this a poor substi- 
tute for an American commitment. 

Adenauer decided to lance the boil by taking what was for him the 
unprecedented step of publicly criticizing his principal ally. At a press 
conference on May 7, 1962, he emphatically rejected the International 
Access Authority. 

It seems to me that this whole plan cannot be implemented. You know 
that in the end three countries, namely, Sweden, Austria, and Switzer- 
land, are to have the decisive voice since the votes of the people from 
the East and West will probably balance out. Well then, I should like to 
ask you whether these countries would answer in the affirmative if they 
were asked whether they liked this role? I don’t think so! 42 

To underline the extent of his displeasure, Adenauer added a bitter dig 
at the Kennedy Administration’s attempt to assign a higher priority to the 
developing world: 

I am also against colonies and I am all for development aid. But I also 
demand that 16,000,000 Germans [in East Germany] be allowed to live 
their own lives. We shall tell that to our friends and our enemies. 43 


590 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


These differences were never resolved. On July 17, 1962, Kennedy was 
still telling Anatoly Dobrynin, the new Soviet Ambassador, that “there 
might well be other issues on which we would be willing to press the 
Germans quite hard, such as, for example, on the structure of an access 
authority.” 44 Since Adenauer had already publicly explained in great de- 
tail his objection to both the composition and the function of such an 
authority, Khrushchev should have known that he held the key to un- 
leashing a major crisis within the Atlantic Alliance. 

Amazingly, just as Soviet success seemed imminent, Khrushchev veered 
off course. Trying to achieve in one stroke the breakthrough which had 
eluded him for the past three years, Khrushchev placed Soviet intermedi- 
ate-range missiles into Cuba. Khrushchev had obviously calculated that, if 
he succeeded in that adventure, his bargaining position in an eventual 
Berlin negotiation would be overwhelming. For the same reason, Ken- 
nedy could not permit such an extension of Soviet strategic power into 
the Western Hemisphere. His bold and skillful handling of the crisis not 
only forced Khrushchev to withdraw the Soviet missiles but, in the pro- 
cess, stripped his Berlin diplomacy of whatever credibility still remained 
to it. 

Recognizing that he had run out of expedients, Khrushchev announced 
in January 1963 that the “success” of the Berlin Wall had made a separate 
peace treaty with Berlin unnecessary. The Berlin crisis was finally over. It 
had lasted five years. Through it, the allies had preserved their position 
on all the most essential matters — albeit with many a vacillation. For his 
part, Khrushchev had achieved no more than to build a wall to keep East 
Germany’s unwilling subjects from bolting the communist utopia. 

It was fortuitous for the West that Khrushchev had overplayed his hand, 
for the Alliance had come perilously close to breaking. The American 
position during both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations was 
based on the traditional American maxim that America was resisting 
change through the threat of force, not change as such. As an academic 
statement, this was unexceptional, provided only that there was a general 
understanding that the outcome of the crisis would be judged by sub- 
stance, not method. 

And in terms of substance, the various schemes under consideration 
within both the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations were extremely 
risky. All had the common drawback of altering the existing framework 
in the direction urged by the Soviets. Nor could it have been otherwise, 
for the Soviet Union had surely not started the crisis in order to worsen 
its position. Every proposed quid pro quo would have obliged the Soviet 
Union to trade a threat it never should have made for some objective 


591 



Diplomacy 


improvement in the status of its East German satellite and the modifica- 
tion of existing access procedures. Adenauer’s twin nightmare — that the 
East German communists might acquire the means to exploit Berlin’s 
vulnerability, and that a gap might arise between Bonn’s obligations to 
the Alliance and its aspiration for national unity — was inherent in any of 
the proposed negotiating schemes. 

Dean Acheson, who had, in his words, been “present at the creation” 
of the postwar alliance system, saw this clearly. In a letter to Truman on 
September 21, 1961, he predicted a humiliating Western defeat over Ber- 
lin “dressed up as statesmanship of the new order.” 45 If such a defeat 
became unavoidable, argued Acheson, the future of the Western Alliance 
would depend on who assumed responsibility for the debacle. “It is 
better,” he wrote to General Lucius Clay in January 1962, “to have the 
followers desert the leader, than to have the leader follow the followers. 
Who then picks up the pieces? Who is trusted to lead in a new start?” 46 It 
was the de Gaulle strategy in reverse. 

In the course of the Berlin crisis, German priorities shifted. Through- 
out the postwar period, Adenauer’s principal reliance had been on the 
United States. A year after Khrushchev’s ultimatum, that was no longer 
the case. A State Department intelligence report of August 26, 1959, noted 
Adenauer’s distress at the lack of unanimity among the allies. According 
to the report, Adenauer still hoped for a restoration of allied unity. But if 
a “US-UK combination appears to be moving toward an understanding 
with Khrushchev, Adenauer will be forced to shift his main reliance to 
France.” 47 

Throughout the crisis, Khrushchev behaved like a chess player who, 
having made a dazzling opening move, sits back in the expectation that 
the opponent will surrender upon contemplating his dilemma without 
playing the game to the finish. In reading the diplomatic record, it is 
difficult to comprehend why Khrushchev never explored any of the innu- 
merable negotiating options that were offered, debated, and so often 
hinted at. Among these were the Access Authority, the two peace treaties, 
and the “guaranteed-city” concept. In the end, Khrushchev never did act 
on any of his deadlines, or on the many options he had had to engage 
the Western allies in a negotiation. After three years of ultimatums and 
blood-curdling threats, Khrushchev’s only real “success” was the building 
of the Berlin Wall, which ultimately came to symbolize the failure of the 
Soviet Berlin policy. 

Khrushchev had snared himself in a tangled web of his own creation. 
Trapped, he found that he could not hope to achieve his demands without 
war. For this he proved never quite ready, and yet he dared not take the 


592 



Khrushchev's Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 


West up on its offers to negotiate lest he be accused by the “hawks” in 
the Kremlin and his Chinese cohorts of having settled for too little. Too 
weak to steer his “doves” toward a more confrontational course, too 
unsure of his standing to impose concessions on his “hawks,” Khrushchev 
procrastinated as long as he could, then staked everything on a desperate 
roll of the dice by placing missiles in Cuba. 

The Berlin crisis — together with its culmination in the Cuban missile 
crisis — marked a turning point in the Cold War, though it was not per- 
ceived as such at the time. Had the democracies not become so consumed 
by their internal disputes, they might have interpreted the Berlin crisis 
for what it was — a demonstration of latent Soviet weakness. In the end, 
Khrushchev was obliged to continue to live with a Western outpost deep 
within Soviet territory, having failed to achieve any of the goals he had 
trumpeted when he launched the crisis. Thus the division of Europe into 
two blocks was reaffirmed again, as it had been in the Hungarian Revolu- 
tion of 1956. Both sides would complain about that state of affairs, but 
neither ever attempted to alter it by force. 

The cumulative result of the failure of Khrushchev’s Berlin and Cuban 
initiatives was that the Soviet Union did not again risk posing a direct 
challenge to the United States, except during a brief flare-up at the end 
of the 1973 Middle East War. Though the Soviets assembled a vast force 
of long-range missiles, the Kremlin never deemed these sufficient to 
mount a direct threat to established American rights. Instead, Soviet mili- 
tary pressure veered off in the direction of supporting so-called wars of 
national liberation in such areas of the developing world as Angola, Ethio- 
pia, Afghanistan, and Nicaragua. 

For a decade, the Soviets made no further attempts to impede access 
to Berlin, which was continued under established procedures. In that 
interval, recognition of the East German regime came about gradually 
and as a West German decision supported by all the major German 
parties, not as an initiative imposed by the United States. In time, the allies 
exploited the Soviets’ eagerness for the recognition of East Germany by 
insisting on the precondition that the Soviet Union put in place ironclad 
access procedures to Berlin as well as confirm its four-power status. The 
Soviets formally accepted these conditions in the Quadripartite 
Agreement of 1971. There was no further challenge to Berlin or the 
access routes until the wall was pulled down in 1989, leading to German 
reunification. Containment had worked after all. 


593 



CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 

Concepts of Western Unity: 

Macmillan, de Gaulle, 
Eisenhower, and Kennedy 


1 he Berlin crisis marked the final consolidation of the two spheres of 
influence that had, for nearly two decades, been jostling each other along 
the dividing line partitioning the European Continent. In the first phase 
of this process, from 1945 to 1948, Stalin had established the Soviet 
sphere of influence, turning the countries of Eastern Europe into satellite 
states and, implicitly, threatening Western Europe. In the second phase, 
from 1949 to 1956, the democracies reacted by forming NATO, by consol- 
idating their occupation zones into the Federal Republic, and by initiating 
the process of Western European integration. 

During the period of consolidation, there were periodic attempts by 
each camp to break up the sphere of the other. All these schemes failed. 


594 




Concepts of Western Unity 


Stalins peace note of 1952, which had been designed to lure the Federal 
Republic out of the Western camp, never got anywhere — in part due to 
Stalin’s death. The emptiness of Dulles’ strategy for the “liberation” of 
Eastern Europe was demonstrated during the abortive Hungarian upris- 
ing of 1956. Khrushchev’s Berlin ultimatum of 1958 represented another 
attempt to separate the Federal Republic from the West. But in the end, 
the Soviets had to settle for tightening their hold over their East German 
satellite. After the Cuban missile crisis, the Soviets concentrated on pene- 
trating the developing world. The result was a bipolar stability in Europe, 
the paradoxical nature of which was summed up in 1958 by the great 
French philosopher and political scientist Raymond Aron: 

The present situation of Europe is abnormal, or absurd. But it is a 
clearcut one and everybody knows where the demarcation line is and 
nobody is very much afraid of what could happen. If something hap- 
pens on the other side of the Iron Curtain — and we have the experi- 
ence of a year ago — nothing happens on this side. So a clear partition 
of Europe is considered, rightly or wrongly, to be less dangerous than 
any other arrangement. 1 

It was precisely this stability that made it possible for latent differences 
within the so-called Atlantic Community to rise to the surface. In the 
immediate aftermath of the Berlin crisis, Macmillan for Great Britain, de 
Gaulle for France, and Kennedy for the United States were obliged to 
reconcile their clashing perspectives on the nature of the Alliance, the 
role of nuclear weapons, and the future of Europe. 

Macmillan was the first British prime minister to confront explicitly the 
painful reality that his country was no longer a world power. Churchill 
had dealt with America and the Soviet Union as an equal. Even though 
his stance had not reflected the true balance of forces, Churchill bridged 
the gap between wishful thinking and reality with his genius and by 
invoking Great Britain’s heroic wartime effort. When Churchill urged 
negotiations with Moscow in the immediate aftermath of the war, while 
he was the leader of the Opposition, and again after Stalin’s death in 1953, 
when he was Prime Minister, he did so as spokesman for a major power 
which, though no longer in the front rank, was nevertheless capable of 
affecting the calculations of all the others. Throughout the Suez crisis, 
Eden still conducted himself as the head of government of a substantially 
autonomous Great Power with the capacity for unilateral action. By the 
time Macmillan was faced with the Berlin crisis, the illusion that Great 
Britain by itself had the capacity to change the strategic calculations of the 
superpowers could no longer be sustained. 


595 



Diplomacy 


An urbane, elegant skeptic, Macmillan represented the last of the old- 
style Tories. He was a product of the Edwardian Era, when Great Britain 
was the world’s pre-eminent power and the Union Jack flew in virtually 
every corner of the globe. Though he was possessed of a wicked sense of 
humor, there was about Macmillan a melancholy inseparable from his 
being obliged to participate in England’s steady decline after the har- 
rowing experience of the First World War from the zenith of power. 
Macmillan would recount movingly the reunion of the four survivors of 
his class at Christ Church in Oxford. During the coal miners’ strike of 
1984, Macmillan — who by then had been out of office for some twenty 
years — told me that, though he greatly respected Mrs. Thatcher and un- 
derstood what she was trying to do, he would never have been able to 
bring himself to conduct a fight to the finish with the sons of the men he 
had had to send over the top in the First World War, and who had 
sacrificed themselves so selflessly. 

Macmillan was propelled to 10 Downing Street by the Suez debacle, 
the watershed event in his country’s declining global role. Macmillan 
played his hand with great panache but not without a certain reluctance. 
As a former Chancellor of the Exchequer, he knew all too well that Great 
Britain’s economy was on the decline, and that its military role would 
never match the vast arsenals of the nuclear superpowers. Great Britain 
had rejected the Common Market when it had first been proposed. Cham- 
berlain’s reference in 1938 to Czechoslovakia as a small, faraway country 
of which Britons knew little was an accurate description of the detach- 
ment with which a country that had spent a century and a half fighting 
colonial wars on the other side of the world viewed crises in Europe 
several hundred miles away. 

But by the late 1930s, Great Britain could no longer view Europe from 
a distance, as a place where British forces occasionally intervened to 
put down a would-be tyrant. Macmillan therefore reversed the policy of 
aloofness from Europe and applied for membership in the European 
Community. Yet, despite the Suez debacle, Macmillan’s foremost concern 
remained the cultivation of Great Britain’s “special relationship” with the 
United States. 

Great Britain did not consider itself an exclusively European power. 
After all, its dangers had too often originated in Europe while its salvation 
had come from across the Atlantic Ocean. Macmillan did not accept the 
Gaullist proposition that European security would be enhanced by disso- 
ciation from the United States. When all was said and done, Great Britain 
was probably at least as ready to fight for Berlin as France, though its 
motive would have been not so much to vindicate the vague concept of 


596 



Concepts of Western Unity 


allied occupation rights as to support America in its assessment that the 
global balance of power was being threatened. 

After Suez, France and Great Britain drew diametrically opposite con- 
clusions from their humiliation at the hands of America. France acceler- 
ated its independence; Great Britain opted for strengthening the 
partnership with America. Visions of Anglo-American partnership had in 
fact preceded the Second World War, and had been nurtured since. As 
early as 1935, Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin had sketched them in a 
speech at Albert Hall: 


I have always believed that the greatest security against war in any part 
of the world whatever, in Europe, in the East, anywhere, would be the 
dose collaboration of the British Empire with the United States of 

America It may be a hundred years before that desirable end may 

be attained; it may never come to pass. But sometimes we may have 
our dreams. I look forward to the future, and I see that union of forces 
for peace and justice in the world, and I cannot but think, even if men 
cannot advocate it openly yet, that some day and some time those who 
follow us may see it 2 


It did not take a hundred years for that dream to come true. Starting with 
the Second World War, Great Britain and the United States were bound 
by mutual necessities, even if these necessities were filtered through very 
differing historical experiences. 

One important factor in forging a strong connection between the two 
nations was Great Britain’s extraordinary ability to adjust to changing 
circumstances. It may well have been true, as Dean Acheson pointed out, 
that Great Britain had clung too long to the illusion of empire and had 
failed to define a contemporary role for itself in Europe. 3 On the other 
hand, in its relations with Washington, Great Britain demonstrated on an 
almost daily basis that, old country that it was, it did not deceive itself on 
fundamental issues. Having shrewdly calculated that they could no longer 
hope to shape American policy by the traditional methods of balancing 
benefits and risks, British leaders chose — especially after Suez — to tread 
the road to greater influence. British leaders of both parties managed 
to make themselves so indispensable to the American decision-making 
process that presidents and their entourages came to regard consultations 
with London not as a special favor toward a weaker ally but as a vital 
component of their own governance. 

It was hardly the case, however, that Great Britain agreed with the 
American philosophy of international relations. The British have never 


597 



Diplomacy 


shared the American view of the perfectibility of man, and have not been 
given to proclaiming moral absolutes. In terms of their philosophy, Brit- 
ish leaders have generally been Hobbesian. Expecting the worst from 
man, they rarely find themselves disappointed. In foreign policy, Great 
Britain has always tended to practice a convenient form of ethical egoism: 
what was good for Great Britain was considered good for the rest of the 
world as well. 

Considerable self-confidence not to speak of a sense of innate superior- 
ity was needed to carry off such a conception. When, in the nineteenth 
century, a French diplomat told British Prime Minister Palmerston that 
France had grown accustomed to Palmerston’s pulling a diplomatic card 
out of his sleeve at the last moment, the plucky Englishman had re- 
sponded, “God put the cards there.” Yet Great Britain put national egoism 
into practice with such an intuitive sense of moderation that its presump- 
tion to represent the general good was frequently justified. 

It was under Macmillan that Great Britain completed the transition 
from power to influence. He decided to embed British policy in American 
policy and to expand the range of British options by skillfully handling 
relations with Washington. Macmillan never contested a philosophical or 
conceptual point, and rarely laid down an open challenge to key Ameri- 
can policies. He readily conceded the center stage to Washington while 
seeking to shape the drama from behind the curtains. De Gaulle fre- 
quently behaved obstreperously in order to make ignoring him painful; 
Macmillan made it so easy for the United States to solicit Britain’s views 
that ignoring him would have been embarrassing. 

Macmillan’s tactics during the Berlin crisis embodied that approach. 
Access to Berlin did not seem to him worth a nuclear holocaust. On the 
other hand, risking the loss of the American connection was even greater 
anathema. He would stand alongside the Americans even in the event of 
a nuclear showdown, which was more than most of the other allies could 
guarantee. However, before he had to face that ultimate choice, Macmil- 
lan was determined to explore the available alternatives. Making a virtue 
out of necessity, he set out to present himself as the West’s prime advocate 
of peace, to restrain precipitate American actions, and to demonstrate to 
his British public that “their leaders have made every effort to reach 
understanding and agreement .” 4 

Means quickly turned into ends. Macmillan had enough confidence in 
his own dexterity to try to draw the sting from the Soviet challenge by 
engaging in skillfully managed negotiations. To Macmillan’s way of think- 
ing, the diplomatic process itself might serve to defuse the threat of 
Khrushchev’s ultimatums by using one inconclusive negotiation after an- 


598 



Concepts of Western Unity 


other to extend whatever deadlines the impetuous Soviet leader might 
announce. 

To the extreme displeasure of Adenauer, Macmillan undertook an 
eleven-day-long journey to the Soviet Union in February-March 1959, 
even though by then Khrushchev had reiterated his initial ultimatum 
several times. Macmillan achieved nothing of substance while Khrushchev 
took advantage of his presence to repeat his threats. Nevertheless, the 
Prime Minister relentlessly and unflappably pursued the goal of schedul- 
ing a series of conferences as the most practical means for getting around 
Khrushchev’s deadlines. He reflected in his memoirs: 

I was anxious to promote the concept of a series of meetings moving 
steadily forward from point to point in which “peaceful co-existence” 

(to use the jargon of the day) — if not peace — could reign unchallenged 
in the world. 5 

However, when talks become their own objective, they are at the mercy 
of the party most prepared to break them off, or at least the party that is 
able to give that impression. Thus Khrushchev found himself able to 
define what in fact was “negotiable.” Eager to keep a dialogue going, 
Macmillan expended enormous ingenuity on seeking to discover some 
item on the Soviet agenda that could be pursued with relative safety. The 
day after receiving Khrushchev’s formal note on Berlin on November 27, 
1958, Macmillan had written to Selwyn Lloyd, his Foreign Secretary: “We 
shall not be able to avoid negotiation. How is it to be carried out? Will it 
necessarily lead to discussion of the future of a united Germany and 
possible ‘Disengagement Plans’?” 6 

The common feature of the various disengagement plans was the 
establishment of zones of limited armaments in Central Europe, which 
had been defined as Germany, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, and the with- 
drawal of nuclear weapons from these countries. For Macmillan and, to a 
lesser degree, the American leaders as well, the location of these weapons 
had primarily symbolic importance. Since nuclear strategy would have to 
rely on America’s nuclear arsenal (the overwhelming portion of which 
was not located on the European Continent), discussing a disengagement 
scheme with the Soviets seemed to Macmillan like a relatively innocuous 
way of buying time. 

Adenauer opposed all of these schemes because once American nu- 
clear weapons were removed from Germany, they would have to be 
returned to America, thus breaking what Adenauer considered the crucial 
political link in nuclear defense between Europe and America. His rea- 


599 



Diplomacy 


soning — or at least that of his defense experts — was that, as long as 
nuclear weapons were stationed on German soil, the Soviet Union could 
not risk attacking Central Europe without destroying these weapons. And 
since this would require a nuclear attack, an American response would 
be nearly automatic. 

If America’s nuclear weapons were removed to America, however, a 
conventional attack on Germany would become feasible. Adenauer was 
uncertain whether, in light of the devastation it would wreak upon their 
country, the American leaders’ response would then be to initiate nuclear 
war. The exploration of negotiating options with respect to Berlin thus 
became a surrogate for the continuing debate over the military strategy 
of the Atlantic Alliance. 

Whenever either Macmillan or Eisenhower undertook any solitary dip- 
lomatic initiative, the reaction of the other served to illustrate that vanity 
is never absent from the relations among statesmen. Although they were 
good personal friends, in early 1959, Eisenhower was irritated by Macmil- 
lan’s foray to Moscow; and in the fall of the same year, Macmillan turned 
churlish when he learned that Eisenhower had invited Khrushchev to 
Camp David: 

The President, having got himself embroiled in the doctrine of “no 
Summit without progress at the Foreign Ministers’ meeting,” is now 
trying to disengage. The only way that he has thought of is to substitute 
jollification for discussion. So he is asking Khrushchev to stay with him 
in America and promising a return visit to Russia. All this seems rather 
odd diplomacy. 7 

It was not as odd as it was inevitable. Once Khrushchev realized that 
Great Britain would not separate from America, he concentrated on Ei- 
senhower. In Khrushchev’s view, Macmillan had served his purpose by 
inducing Washington to negotiate. For, in the final analysis, the only 
interlocutor who could deliver what Khrushchev sought was the Ameri- 
can president. Thus all the principal, substantive discussions were those 
between Khrushchev and Eisenhower at Camp David, and later between 
Khrushchev and Kennedy at Vienna. Yet, the more America and the Soviet 
Union monopolized the international dialogue, the more they created an 
incentive among some NATO allies to seek to achieve some freedom of 
maneuver for themselves. As the Soviet threat to Western Europe dimin- 
ished together with the common fear of Moscow, disagreements within 
the Atlantic Alliance became less risky, and de Gaulle attempted to use 
this state of affairs to encourage a more independent European policy. 


600 



Concepts of Western Unity 


But the choice of whose lead Great Britain would follow proved to 
be no contest. Since Macmillan preferred subordination to America to 
subordination to Europe, he had no incentive to encourage de Gaulle’s 
design, and he never went along with moves to split Europe from America 
no matter what the pretext. Nevertheless, in defending vital British inter- 
ests, Macmillan was every bit as tenacious as de Gaulle. This became 
apparent during the so-called Skybolt affair. 

To extend the life of its aging bomber fleet, Great Britain had decided 
to buy Skybolt, a long-range American air-launched cruise missile then in 
the process of being developed. In the fall of 1962, without advance 
warning, the Kennedy Administration canceled Skybolt, allegedly on tech- 
nical grounds but in fact to reduce the reliance on airplanes, which were 
thought to be more vulnerable than missiles, and almost certainly to 
discourage an autonomous British nuclear capability. A unilateral Ameri- 
can decision made without prior consultation with Great Britain doomed 
the British bomber forces to rapid obsolescence. French warnings against 
dependence on Washington seemed to be confirmed. 

The next phase of the Skybolt affair, however, demonstrated the bene- 
fits of the “special relationship” with America. Macmillan called in some 
of the chits he had accumulated through his patient fostering of American 
ties, nor was he any too gentle about it: 

If the difficulties arising from the development of Skybolt were used, 
or seemed to be used, as a method of forcing Britain out of an indepen- 
dent nuclear capacity, the results would be very serious indeed. It 
would be deeply resented both by those of our people who favoured 
an independent nuclear capability and by those who opposed it. It 
would offend the sense of national pride and would be resisted by 
every means in our power. 8 

Kennedy and Macmillan met in Nassau, where, on December 21, they 
agreed to modernize the Anglo-American nuclear partnership. America 
would compensate Great Britain for the Skybolt by selling it five Polaris 
submarines and associated missiles, for which Great Britain would de- 
velop its own nuclear warheads. To meet America’s concern about main- 
taining central control of nuclear strategy, Great Britain agreed to “assign” 
these submarines to NATO, except in cases in which “the supreme na- 
tional interest was at stake.” 9 

The integration of British forces into NATO turned out to be largely 
token. Since Great Britain was free to use the submarines whenever in its 
“supreme national interest,” and since, by definition, the use of nuclear 


601 



Diplomacy 


weapons would never be considered except when the supreme national 
interest was at stake, the Nassau Agreement effectively conceded to Great 
Britain by consultation the same freedom of action France was trying to 
extort by confrontation. The difference between the British and French 
attitudes toward their nuclear weapons was that Great Britain was pre- 
pared to sacrifice form to substance, whereas de Gaulle, in striving to 
reassert France’s identity, equated form with substance. 

France, of course, was in an altogether different situation, because it 
had no prospect of gaining the same influence over American decisions 
that Great Britain enjoyed. Therefore, under the leadership of de Gaulle, 
France raised the philosophical issue of the nature of Atlantic cooperation 
in a way which turned into a contest for the leadership of Europe and, 
for America, into a reacquaintance with the historic style of European 
diplomacy. 

The United States had been presiding over world affairs since the end 
of the Second World War in a manner not previously available to any 
nation. With only a small portion of the world’s population, it was produc- 
ing nearly a third of all the world’s goods and services. Reinforced by an 
enormous edge in nuclear technology, America basked in a vast margin 
of superiority over any conceivable rival or combination of rivals. 

For several decades, this surfeit of blessings had caused American lead- 
ers to forget how unrepresentative the attitudes of a devastated, temporar- 
ily impotent, and therefore pliant Europe were compared to Europe’s 
conduct when it was dominating world affairs for two centuries. They 
failed to recall the European dynamism which had launched the Indus- 
trial Revolution, the political philosophy which had spawned the concept 
of national sovereignty, or the European style of diplomacy which had 
operated a complex balance-of-power system for some three centuries. 
As Europe recovered, with America’s indispensable help, some of the 
traditional patterns of its diplomacy were bound to recur, particularly in 
France, where modern statecraft had originated under Richelieu. 

No one felt this need more strongly than Charles de Gaulle. In the 
1960s, at the height of his running controversy with the United States, it 
became fashionable to accuse the French President of suffering from 
delusions of grandeur. His problem was in fact the precise opposite: 
how to restore identity to a country suffused with a sense of failure and 
vulnerability. Unlike America, France was not supremely powerful; unlike 
Great Britain, it did not view World War II as a unifying, or even an 
edifying, experience. Few countries have experienced the travails of 
France after it had lost much of its youth in World War I. 10 The survivors 
of that catastrophe realized that France could not withstand another such 
ordeal. In these terms, World War II became a nightmare come true, 


602 



Concepts of Western Unity 


rendering France’s collapse in 1940 a psychological as well as a military 
disaster. And while France technically had emerged from the war as one 
of the victors, French leaders knew all too well that it had been saved 
largely through the efforts of others. 

Peace brought no respite. The Fourth Republic experienced the same 
governmental instability as the Third and, in addition, it had to traverse 
the searing course of decolonization. Humiliated in 1940, the French 
army had been barely reconstituted when it was obliged to engage in 
nearly two decades of frustrating colonial wars, first in Indochina and 
then in Algeria, each of which ended in defeat. Blessed with a stable 
government and with its self-assurance enhanced by total victory, the 
United States could throw itself single-mindedly into whatever task its 
values dictated. Governing a country racked by a generation of conflict 
and decades of humiliation, de Gaulle judged policies not so much ac- 
cording to pragmatic criteria as according to whether they could contrib- 
ute to the restoration of French self-esteem. 

The resulting conflict between France and the United States became all 
the more bitter because the two sides, profoundly misunderstanding each 
other, never seemed to be talking about the same subject. Although they 
were generally unpretentious personalities, American leaders tended to 
be cocksure about their practical prescriptions. De Gaulle, whose people 
had turned skeptical after too many enthusiasms shattered and too many 
dreams proved fragile, found it necessary to compensate for his society’s 
deep-seated insecurities by a haughty', even overbearing, demeanor. The 
interaction of the American leadership’s personal humility and historical 
arrogance, and de Gaulle’s personal arrogance and historical humility, 
defined the psychological gulf between America and France. 

Because Washington took the uniformity of interests among the mem- 
bers of the Western Alliance for granted, it treated consultation as the 
cure-all for every disagreement. In the American view, an alliance was 
like a publicly held corporation; influence within it was deemed to reflect 
each party’s proportionate share of ownership, and should be calculated 
in direct proportion to a nation’s material contribution to the common 
effort. 

Nothing within France’s centuries-long tradition of conducting dip- 
lomacy led it to such conclusions. Ever since Richelieu, France’s initia- 
tives had invariably grown out of a calculation of risks and rewards. As 
the product of that tradition, de Gaulle was less concerned with the 
nature of consultative machinery than with accumulating options for the 
contingency of disagreement. De Gaulle believed that these options 
would determine the relative bargaining positions. To de Gaulle, sound 
relations among nations depended on calculations of interest, not on 


603 



Diplomacy 


formal procedures for settling disputes. He did not view harmony as a 
natural state, but as something that had to be wrested out of a conflict of 
interests: 

Man “limited by his nature” is “infinite in his desires.” The world is 
thus full of opposing forces. Of course, human wisdom has often suc- 
ceeded in preventing these rivalries from degenerating into murderous 
conflicts. But the competition of efforts is the condition of life. ... In 
the last analysis and as always, it is only in equilibrium that the world 
will find peace. 11 


My own brief acquaintance with de Gaulle provided a stark introduction 
to his principles. Our first encounter took place during Nixon’s visit to 
Paris in March 1969. At the Elysee Palace, where de Gaulle was hosting a 
large reception, an aide located me in the crowd to say that the French 
President wished to speak with me. Somewhat awestruck, I approached 
the towering figure. Upon seeing me, he dismissed the group around 
him and, without a word of greeting or other social courtesy, welcomed 
me with this query: “Why don’t you get out of Vietnam?” I replied with 
some diffidence that a unilateral retreat would undermine American cred- 
ibility. De Gaulle was not impressed, and asked where such a loss of 
credibility might occur. When I indicated the Middle East, his remoteness 
turned into melancholy and he remarked: “How very odd. I thought it 
was precisely in the Middle East that your enemies were having the 
credibility problem.” 

The next day, after a meeting with the French President, Nixon invited 
me to comment on de Gaulle’s exposition of his vision of a Europe 
composed of nation-states — the famous "Europe de patries. ” Foolhardily, 
for de Gaulle did not relish debating with assistants — or, for that matter, 
being in the presence of assistants — I asked how France proposed to 
keep Germany from dominating the Europe he had just described. Obvi- 
ously, de Gaulle did not consider this query to merit an extensive reply. 
"Par la guerre (through war),” he replied curtly — a mere six years after 
he had signed a treaty of permanent friendship with Adenauer. 

Single-minded devotion to the French national interest shaped de 
Gaulle’s aloof and uncompromising style of diplomacy. Whereas Ameri- 
can leaders stressed partnership, de Gaulle emphasized the responsibility 
of states to look after their own security. Whereas Washington wanted to 
assign a portion of the overall task to each member of the Alliance, de 
Gaulle believed that such a division of labor would relegate France to a 
subordinate role and destroy the French sense of identity: 


604 



Concepts of Western Unity 


It is intolerable for a great State to leave its destiny up to the decisions 
and action of another State, however friendly it may be — [T]he inte- 
grated country loses interest in its national defense, since it is not 
responsible for it. 12 

This explains de Gaulle’s nearly stereotyped diplomatic procedure of 
submitting proposals with a minimum of explanation, and, if they were 
rejected, implementing them unilaterally. For de Gaulle, nothing mat- 
tered more than for the French to see themselves and to be perceived by 
others as acting of their own free will. De Gaulle treated the humiliation 
of 1940 as a temporary setback to be overcome by stern and uncompro- 
mising leadership. To his way of thinking, France could never accept the 
slightest appearance of being subordinate, even to its feared and re- 
spected American ally: 

. . . with regard to the United States — rich, active and powerful — 
[France] found herself in a position of dependence. France constantly 
needed its assistance in order to avoid monetary collapse. It was from 
America that she received the weapons for her soldiers. France’s secu- 
rity was dependent entirely on its protection [T]hese undertakings 

in the guise of integration were automatically taking American authority 
as a postulate. This was the case with regard to the project for a so- 
called supranational Europe, in which France as such would have disap- 
peared ... a Europe without political reality, without economic drive, 
without a capacity for defense, and therefore doomed, in the face of the 
Soviet bloc, to being nothing more than a dependent of that great 
Western power, which itself had a policy, an economy and a defense — 
the United States of America. 13 

De Gaulle was not anti-American in principle. He was willing to cooperate 
whenever, in his view, French and American interests genuinely con- 
verged. Thus, during the Cuban missile crisis, American officials were 
astonished by de Gaulle’s all-out support — the most unconditional back- 
ing extended to them by any allied leader. And he opposed the various 
schemes of disengagement in Central Europe, above all because it would 
leave American military forces too far away and the Soviet army too near: 

. . . this “extrication” or “disengagement” in itself has no meaning for 
us which is of any value. For if disarmament did not cover a zone which 
is as near to the Urals as it is to the Atlantic, how would France be pro- 
tected? What then, in case of conflict, would prevent an aggressor from 
crossing by a leap or a flight the undefended German no man’s land?, 14 


605 



Diplomacy 


De Gaulle’s insistence on independence would have remained theoreti- 
cal had he not linked it with a number of propositions whose practical 
consequence was to weaken America’s role in Europe. The first of these 
was the assertion that America could not be relied on to remain in Europe 
indefinitely. Europe had to prepare itself — under French leadership — to 
face its future alone. De Gaulle did not claim that he preferred such an 
outcome, and he seemed oblivious to the proposition that his assertions 
might turn into self-fulfilling prophesies. 

During a visit to Paris in 1959, President Eisenhower tackled the issue 
head-on when he asked the French leader: “Why do you doubt that 
America would identify its fate with Europe?” 15 In light of Eisenhower’s 
conduct during the Suez crisis, it was an odd and somewhat self-righteous 
question. De Gaulle politely responded by reminding Eisenhower of 
more remote lessons of its history. America had not come to France’s 
rescue in the First World War until after three years of mortal peril, and 
America had entered the Second World War only after France was already 
occupied. In the Nuclear Age, both interventions would have come too 
late. 

De Gaulle missed no opportunity to attempt to demonstrate that, on 
specific issues, America’s judgment was less European than that of France, 
and he ruthlessly exploited Khrushchev’s Berlin ultimatum. De Gaulle 
wanted France to be perceived in Bonn as a more reliable ally than 
America, and gradually to substitute French for American leadership. And 
when unilateral American initiatives placed several heretofore inviolate 
tenets of Western postwar Berlin policy on the diplomatic agenda, Ade- 
nauer’s growing restlessness posed both a danger and an opportunity for 
France. Danger, because “if the German people were to change sides, the 
European balance would be upset, and this could be the signal for war”; 
opportunity, because German fears might enhance French influence in 
Europe. 16 

What de Gaulle had in mind was a Europe organized along the lines of 
Bismarck’s Germany — that is, unified on the basis of states, one of which 
(France) would play the dominant role, with the same function that Prus- 
sia had had inside imperial Germany. Everybody would have had some 
role in de Gaulle’s redefinition of the old dream of Richelieu’s pre-emi- 
nent France.- the Soviet Union would have seen to the division of Ger- 
many; the United States to Western Europe’s defense against the Soviet 
Union; France to diverting German national aspirations into European 
unity. But, unlike Prussia, France was not the strongest state in Western 
Europe; it did not have the economic muscle to dominate the others and, 
finally, it was in no position to dominate an equilibrium containing the 
two superpowers. 


606 



Concepts of Western Unity 


These disagreements might have been left to the passage of time, espe- 
cially since Adenauer was desperately eager to stay close to the United 
States. Moreover, all German leaders were so well aware of the disparity 
in power between France and the United States that they were not likely 
to trade American nuclear protection for Frances greater vigilance on 
political issues. 

There was one issue, however, over which national disagreement be- 
tween France and America was built into the very essence of the problem 
and which brooked no delay: the control of military strategy in the Nu- 
clear Age. Here, America s insistence on integration and Frances call for 
autonomy were irreconcilable, and no buffers existed to soften the dis- 
pute. Since the power of nuclear weapons was without precedent, history 
could offer no reliable guide in formulating a military strategy. Every 
statesman was flying blind when trying to assess the impact of the new 
technology on both policy and strategy; conclusions about them emerged 
from academic theories for which there existed no empirical experience 
or data. 

In the first decade of the postwar era, it seemed as if nuclear monopoly 
had fulfilled America’s visions of omnipotence. But by the end of the 
1950 s it was becoming obvious that each of the nuclear superpowers 
would soon be able to inflict on the other a level of devastation no 
previous society could have imagined, threatening the survival of civiliza- 
tion itself. 

This realization was at the heart of a revolution that was about to 
change the very nature of international relations. Though weapons had 
been progressively growing more sophisticated, their destructiveness had 
remained relatively limited up until the end of the Second World War. 
Wars required a vast mobilization of resources and manpower, which 
took time to accumulate and to assemble. Casualties mounted relatively 
gradually. Theoretically, a war could be stopped before it got out of hand. 

Since power could only be increased in relatively small increments, 
the proposition that a state might possess too much power for rational 
political purposes would have appeared preposterous. Yet this was pre- 
cisely what happened in the Nuclear Age. The superpowers’ central strate- 
gic dilemma became not how to accumulate additional power, but how 
to circumscribe the vast arsenals at their disposal. Neither side ever man- 
aged to resolve that challenge. Political tensions which would formerly 
almost surely have led to war were contained by the fear of nuclear 
conflagration, creating a threshold of risk that would preserve the peace 
for half a century. But this state of affairs also brought about a sense 
of political frustration and made non-nuclear challenges more plausible 
and more frequent. Never had the military gap between a superpower 


607 



Diplomacy 


and a non-nuclear state been greater; never was it less likely to be in- 
voked. Neither North Korea nor North Vietnam was deterred by America’s 
nuclear arsenal from pursuing its objectives, even against American mili- 
tary forces; nor were the Afghan guerrillas deterred by the nuclear capac- 
ity of the Soviet Union. 

For the first time in history, the Nuclear Age had made it possible to 
alter the balance of power by means of developments taking place en- 
tirely within the territory of a sovereign state. A single country’s acquisi- 
tion of an atomic bomb altered the balance more significantly than any 
territorial acquisition of the past. Yet, with the sole exception of an Israeli 
strike against an Iraqi nuclear reactor in 1981, no country during the 
entire Cold War ever resorted to force in order to prevent such an in- 
crease in the power of an adversary. 

The Nuclear Age turned strategy into deterrence, and deterrence into 
an esoteric intellectual exercise. Since deterrence can only be tested 
negatively, by events that do not take place, and since it is never possible 
to demonstrate why something has not occurred, it became especially 
difficult to assess whether the existing policy was the best possible policy 
or a just barely effective one. Perhaps deterrence was even unnecessary 
because it was impossible to prove whether the adversary ever intended 
to attack in the first place. Such imponderables caused domestic and 
international debates on nuclear matters to run the gamut from pacifism 
to intransigence, from paralyzing doubt to an exorbitant sense of power, 
and from unprovable theories of defense to undemonstrable theories of 
arms control. 

The potential strain in any alliance — the possibility of divergent inter- 
ests — was exacerbated by these uncertainties. Historically, nations have 
in general, though certainly not always, adhered to alliances because the 
consequences of abandoning an ally were deemed to be more risky 
than fulfilling ones obligations. In the Nuclear Age, this rule no longer 
necessarily held true; abandoning an ally risked eventual disaster, but 
resorting to nuclear war at the side of an ally guaranteed immediate 
catastrophe. 

To enhance nuclear deterrence, America and its allies had an incentive 
to emphasize both the certainty and the ferocity of their reaction to 
challenge. To increase the credibility of the threat, but also to reduce the 
scale of the disaster should deterrence fail, America had an even greater 
incentive to find ways to make nuclear war more calculable and less 
catastrophic. Discriminating targeting, central command and control, and 
a strategy of flexible response became increasingly fashionable among 
America’s defense intellectuals. Yet all of America’s allies resisted these 


608 



Concepts of Western Unity 


measures because they feared that, to the extent that nuclear war could 
be made more calculable and more tolerable, aggression might become 
more likely as well. Then too, at the final moment, America might well 
recoil before permitting its nuclear arsenal to be unleashed, however 
limited the option so that Europe might wind up with the worst of both 
worlds: reduced deterrence and unfulfilled strategy. 

These fears were far from trivial. At the same time, the American lead- 
ers’ concern about the problem of multiple triggers posed by autono- 
mous French and British nuclear forces was hardly trivial either. If 
European forces were used to strike at the Soviet Union, they might 
embroil America in a nuclear war. For it was entirely possible that the 
Soviet Union would retaliate against America in order to prevent it from 
profiting from damage inflicted on the Soviet Union. The more likely 
scenario, however, was one in which the Soviet Union’s response against 
America’s allies was so violent as to bring into question whether America 
could passively stand by while its closest allies were being devastated — 
whatever the provocation. 

American leaders therefore were determined to avoid being forced 
into a nuclear war against their will. The decision to risk the destruction 
of their society was already sufficiently ominous without their having to 
worry about its being imposed on them by allies. On the other hand, 
America’s “solution” to this dilemma — to deprive its allies of the capacity 
for independent action — ran up against the historical nightmares of Euro- 
pean history. Europe’s leaders were all too familiar with having to aban- 
don or being abandoned by allies, and for reasons far less pressing than 
nuclear devastation. In their view, their survival depended on depriving 
America, to the greatest extent possible, of the option of separating itself 
from Europe in the event of an imminent nuclear war — or, if that failed, 
of having at their disposal national nuclear forces as a form of reinsur- 
ance. 

The differences between the American and the European approaches 
to nuclear strategy presented an insoluble dilemma. Great Britain’s and 
France’s desire to retain some control over decisions affecting their des- 
tinies was both understandable and in keeping with their histories. Amer- 
ica’s concern about not compounding the perils of the Nuclear Age by 
the solitary initiatives of allies was equally valid. From the point of view 
of deterrence, there was indeed some merit to the British and French 
determination to create additional decision-making centers; the aggres- 
sor’s calculations would be made more complicated by having to take 
into account the existence of independent nuclear forces. From the point 
of view of having a tolerable strategy for conducting a war, America’s 


609 



Diplomacy 


insistence on unified control made equal sense. The conflicting concerns 
were irreconcilable, representing the attempt of nations to determine 
their own fate under unprecedented circumstances and in the face of 
unimaginable dangers. America’s reaction to the dilemma was to try to 
“solve” it; de Gaulle, considering it insoluble, sought to enhance French 
independence. 

American policy was promulgated in two distinct stages, each of which 
reflected the personality of the president who was in office. Eisenhower’s 
approach was to persuade the implacable de Gaulle that an independent 
French nuclear force was not necessary, and to treat attempts to create 
one as a sign of mistrust. With a characteristically American mix of legal- 
ism and idealism, Eisenhower searched for a technical solution to the 
American nightmare of a nuclear war unleashed by its allies. In 1959, on 
the occasion of a visit to Paris, he asked de Gaulle how the various 
national nuclear forces within the Alliance might be integrated into a 
single military plan. At that point, France had announced a nuclear pro- 
gram but had not yet tested a weapon. 

With that question, Eisenhower elicited an answer he was not prepared 
to accept. For de Gaulle, the integration of nuclear forces was a political, 
not a technical, problem. It was symptomatic of the gulf between these 
two conceptions that Eisenhower seemed unaware that de Gaulle had 
answered his own question a year earlier in his proposal for a Director- 
ate. Eisenhower strove for strategic options; de Gaulle sought political 
ones. Eisenhower was primarily concerned with an efficient command 
structure for wartime. De Gaulle was less interested in plans for conduct- 
ing a general war (by which time he considered all to be lost anyway) 
than with augmenting his diplomatic options by maintaining France’s 
freedom of action prior to any war. 

On September 17, 1958, de Gaulle had submitted a memorandum to 
Eisenhower and Macmillan which conveyed his ideas about an appro- 
priate NATO structure. He proposed a political Directorate within the 
Atlantic Alliance composed of the heads of government of the United 
States, Great Britain, and France. The Directorate would meet periodi- 
cally, establish a joint staff, and design joint strategy, especially in relation 
to crises outside the NATO area: 

. . . political and strategic questions of world importance should be en- 
trusted to a new body, consisting of the United States of America, Great 
Britain and France. This body should have the responsibility of taking 
joint decisions on all political matters affecting world security, and of 
drawing up, and if necessary putting into action, strategic plans, espe- 
cially those involving the use of nuclear weapons. It should also be 


610 



Concepts of Western Unity 


responsible for the organisation of the defence, where appropriate, of 
individual operational regions, such as the Arctic, the Atlantic, the Pa- 
cific and the Indian Ocean. These regions could in turn be subdivided 
if necessary. 

To show how serious de Gaulle was about his proposals, he conjoined 
them with the threat of French withdrawal from NATO. “The French 
government,” he noted, “regards such an organisation for security as 
indispensable. Henceforth the whole development of its present partici- 
pation in NATO is predicated on this .” 17 

On one level, de Gaulle was demanding for France a status equal to 
America’s special relationship w T ith Great Britain. On a deeper level, he 
was suggesting a security arrangement similar to Roosevelt’s idea of the 
Four Policemen, with France replacing the Soviet Union as one of the 
players — a sweeping concept of global collective security based on nu- 
clear weapons, although, to be sure, the French nuclear capacity at that 
point was still incipient. 

De Gaulle had penetrated to the heart of the nuclear problem: in the 
Nuclear Age, there could be no technical expedients to ensure coordina- 
tion. The potential risk of using any nuclear weapons was so exorbitant 
that its avoidance tended to drive the various players to assume highly 
national and self-serving postures. The only hope for common action was 
to forge political relationships so intimate that the various participants in 
the consultative process would view themselves as a single unit. Yet such 
a relationship is the most difficult to attain among sovereign nations, and 
was, in any case, made nearly impossible by de Gaulle’s diplomatic style. 

Did de Gaulle envisage the Directorate as a stopgap until the French 
nuclear forces were strong enough to threaten autonomous action? Or 
was he aiming at a new and unprecedented cooperation that would 
anoint France with a special leadership role on the Continent? The answer 
will never be known because the Directorate idea received a very frigid 
reception from both Eisenhower and Macmillan. Great Britain was not 
ready to water down its “special relationship” with the United States; 
America had no wish to provide an incentive for the spread of nuclear 
weapons by creating a Directorate confined to nuclear powers, even less 
to incipient ones. The other NATO members rejected the implication that 
there were two categories of NATO membership — one for the nuclear 
powers, and another for the rest. And American leaders preferred to deal 
with the Atlantic Alliance as if it were a single unit — though how this 
could be reconciled with recent disagreements over Suez and Berlin was 
not self-evident. 

The official reactions of Eisenhower and Macmillan were evasive. Hav- 


611 



Diplomacy 


ing become accustomed to the relatively pliable and extremely transient 
prime ministers of the Fourth Republic, they responded to de Gaulle by 
putting forward essentially bureaucratic schemes in the expectation that, 
with the passage of time, de Gaulle’s proposition would fade away. They 
accepted the principle of regular consultations but sought to limit them 
to a level below that of the heads of government, and indicated their 
preference that the agenda be confined to military issues. 

The tactics of Eisenhower and Macmillan— of seeking to submerge 
substance in procedure — only made sense if one assumed that de Gaulle 
was being grandiloquently frivolous and had no place to go, two assump- 
tions that turned out to be dead wrong. When thwarted, de Gaulle re- 
sorted to his signature tactic of bringing home to his interlocutors that, 
in fact, he had other options. He ordered the removal of American nuclear 
weapons from French soil, withdrew the French fleet from the integrated 
NATO command, and, in 1966, withdrew France from the NATO com- 
mand altogether. But before he took that last fateful step, de Gaulle would 
clash with the dynamic young American President, John F. Kennedy. 

Kennedy represented a new generation of American leaders. They had 
fought in the Second World War but had not directed it; they had sup- 
ported the construction of the postwar order but had not been among its 
creators. Kennedy’s predecessors, who had been “present at the cre- 
ation,” concentrated on preserving what they had built. The Kennedy 
Administration strove for a new architecture. For Truman and Eisen- 
hower, the purpose of the Atlantic Alliance had been to resist Soviet 
aggression; Kennedy wanted to bring about an Atlantic Community that 
would lead the way into what later came to be called a new world order. 

In pursuit of that objective, the Kennedy Administration developed a 
two-pronged approach of trying to find a rational application for nuclear 
weapons while evolving a political definition of what it understood by 
the Atlantic Community. Kennedy was appalled by the cataclysmic conse- 
quences of the still-dominant military doctrine of massive retaliation. 
Under the leadership of his brilliant Secretary of Defense, Robert McNa- 
mara, he strove to develop a strategy that created military options other 
than Armageddon and capitulation. The Kennedy Administration in- 
creased the emphasis on conventional forces, and sought to find a dis- 
criminating use for nuclear weapons. America’s mounting vulnerability 
to nuclear attack by the Soviet Union led to the so-called strategy of 
flexible response, whose command system and multiple options were 
designed to enable the United States to determine, to the extent that the 
adversary cooperated, how and with which weapons a war would be 
fought, and on what terms it would be concluded. 

Yet, for such a strategy to work, nuclear weapons would have to be 


612 



Concepts of Western Unity 


kept under central — that is, American — control. Kennedy referred to the 
French nuclear program as being “inimical” to NATO, and his Secretary 
of Defense castigated the notion of European nuclear forces, including 
Great Britain’s, with a variety of pointed adjectives, among them “danger- 
ous,” “expensive,” “prone to obsolescence,” and “lacking in credibility.” 
Undersecretary of State George Ball weighed in with the argument that 
“the road toward nuclear proliferation has no logical ending.” 18 

The Kennedy Administration therefore urged “integration” of all NATO 
nuclear forces and came up with a project to achieve this objective — 
the NATO Multilateral Force (MLF). A few hundred intermediate-range 
missiles with a range of 1,500-2,000 miles were to be placed on ships 
under NATO command. To underline the Alliance nature of this force, 
the ships would be composed of crews drawn from the participating 
nationalities. 19 But since the United States retained a veto, the MLF did 
not solve NATO’s basic nuclear dilemma; it would be either redundant or 
useless. 

On July 4, 1962, Kennedy proclaimed his lofty Declaration of Interde- 
pendence between the United States and a United Europe. The politically 
and economically integrated Europe would become an equal partner 
of the United States, sharing in the burdens and obligations of world 
leadership. 20 Elaborating on this symbolism in a later speech at the Pauls- 
kirche in Frankfurt, where the liberal German National Assembly of 1848 
had met, Kennedy linked prospects for the Atlantic partnership with Euro- 
pean integration: 

It is only a fully cohesive Europe that can protect us all against fragmen- 
tation of the alliance. Only such a Europe will permit full reciprocity of 
treatment across the ocean, in facing the Atlantic agenda. With only 
such a Europe can we have a full give-and-take between equals, an 
equal sharing of responsibilities, and an equal level of sacrifice. 21 

Kennedy’s eloquent challenge ran aground on the morass of European 
ambivalence composed of growing economic strength and a sense of 
military impotence, especially in the nuclear field. The same qualities 
which rendered flexible response so attractive and so necessary for the 
United States raised doubts among its NATO allies. The practical conse- 
quence of the strategy of flexible response was that it would permit 
Washington to achieve greater freedom of political choice about the deci- 
sion to go to war — an objective de Gaulle sought to constrict with the 
force de frappe, as he called the French nuclear force when it finally came 
into being in the 1960s. The very quality of deliberation and flexibility so 
desirable to America reinforced French arguments in favor of nuclear 


613 



Diplomacy 


autonomy as a hedge against America’s having second thoughts in a mo- 
ment of crisis. Though America’s goal had been to strengthen deterrence 
by making the nuclear threat more credible, most allies preferred to base 
deterrence on the opposite course — increasing the magnitude of the 
adversary’s risk by sticking to a strategy of massive retaliation, no matter 
how nihilistic the consequences. What to do if the bluff did not work was 
never discussed, though the option of surrender cannot be excluded. 

The debate about military integration had a certain theological quality 
about it. In peacetime, the NATO command is primarily a planning staff: 
operationally, the military forces of each ally remain under national com- 
mand, and the right to withdraw forces is so implicit that it has never 
been challenged. This was demonstrated by the withdrawal of French 
forces for use in Algeria, and of American forces during a series of Middle 
East crises— in Lebanon in 1958, in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, and during 
the 1991 Gulf War. While debating the theology and merits of “integra- 
tion,” neither the United States nor France ever defined what common 
action might be possible under the label of “integration” that would be 
prevented by the looser French concept of cooperation. No command 
arrangement could solve the essentially political problem thus analyzed 
by de Gaulle: 

The Americans, our allies and our friends, have for a long time, alone, 
possessed a nuclear arsenal. So long as they alone had such an arsenal 
and so long as they showed their will to use it immediately if Europe 
were attacked . . . the Americans acted in such a way that for France the 
question of an invasion hardly arose, since an attack was beyond all 
probability. . . . Since then the Soviets have also acquired a nuclear arse- 
nal, and that arsenal is powerful enough to endanger the very life of 
America. Naturally, I am not making an evaluation — if indeed it is possi- 
ble to find a relation between the degree of one death and the degree 
of another — but the new and gigantic fact is there. 22 


The Skybolt controversy brought all these latent conflicts to a head. 
Throughout his political life, de Gaulle had resisted the “special relation- 
ship” between America and Great Britain precisely because, in his view, 
it symbolized Great Britain’s status as a Great Power equal to that of the 
United States while reducing France to a secondary position. To be sure, 
Kennedy had offered the same assistance to France’s missile program as 
he had to Great Britain’s. But, to de Gaulle, the nuance of difference 
between integration and coordination defined the essence of a truly inde- 
pendent policy. In any event, the fact that the Nassau Agreement had 


614 



Concepts of Western Unity 


been negotiated by the Anglo-American leaders and communicated to de 
Gaulle publicly via the media guaranteed his rejection of it. Nor would 
he tie his country’s nuclear capability to a technology which, like Skybolt, 
might be canceled at any moment. At a press conference on January 14, 
1963, de Gaulle therefore rejected Kennedy’s offer as publicly as he had 
received it, observing acidly: “Of course, I am only speaking of this pro- 
posal and agreement because they have been published and because 
their content is known.” 23 

While drawing the line, de Gaulle also used the occasion to veto Great 
Britain’s entry into the Common Market and, in the process, rejected 
Kennedy’s view that the European end of the twin pillars needed to be 
organized along supranational lines: 

Any system that would consist of handing over our sovereignty to au- 
gust international assemblies would be incompatible with the rights 
and the duties of the French Republic. But also, such a system w T ould 
undoubtedly find itself powerless to sweep along and lead the peoples 
and, to begin with, our own people, in the domains w T here their souls 
and their flesh are in question . 24 

The high point of de Gaulle’s challenge to American leadership came a 
few days later. De Gaulle and Adenauer signed a treaty of mutual friend- 
ship which provided for permanent consultation on all major issues: 

The two Governments will consult each other, prior to any decision, 
on all important questions of foreign policy, and in the first place on 
questions of common interest, with a view to arriving, insofar as possi- 
ble, at a similar position . 25 

The substance of the treaty was not remarkable. Indeed, it was an empty 
vessel which could be filled with whatever French and the German lead- 
ers might put in it in the years ahead. Symbolically, however, it had 
considerable importance. Since the time of Bismarck’s departure in 1890, 
France and Great Britain had opposed Germany in all international crises. 
Yet, w T hen de Gaulle excluded Great Britain from the Common Market, 
despite strong American pressure, it was a German chancellor w T ho 
helped to prevent France’s isolation. France might not be strong enough 
to impose its own solutions on outstanding issues but, backed by Ger- 
many, it would be strong enough to block those of others. 

Ultimately, the issue came down to the question of why nations cooper- 
ate. In the American view, all reasonable peoples in the end come to the 


615 



Diplomacy 


same conclusion; hence, common objectives are taken more or less for 
granted, and emphasis is placed on the machinery with which to imple- 
ment the underlying harmony. The European approach springs from a 
long history of conflicting national interests; reconciling these interests 
has been the essence of European diplomacy. European leaders perceive 
harmony as something which needs to be eked out of the environment 
from case to case, through deliberate acts of statesmanship. That belief 
was precisely what was at issue with respect to nuclear control in the 
1960s; it was at the heart of de Gaulle’s rejection of a supranational 
Europe, and would recur in the debate over the Maastricht Treaty in the 
1990s. No doubt, de Gaulle was driven as well by less philosophical 
motives. A disciple of Richelieu, he perceived France’s dominant role in 
the European Community as being threatened by British entry, both be- 
cause of the weight which Great Britain represented and due to its affinity 
with the United States. 

Still, however selfish his answers, de Gaulle’s questions went to the 
heart of America’s international role, especially in the post-Cold War era. 
For one of the most difficult lessons America has yet to learn is that 
nations cooperate for long periods only when they share common politi- 
cal goals, and that American policy must focus on these goals rather than 
on the mechanisms used to reach them. A functioning international order 
must leave enough room for differing national interests. And though it 
should attempt to reconcile them, it must never simply assume them 
away. 

Kennedy’s soaring vision of an Atlantic partnership based on the twin 
pillars of Europe and America supporting a common roof was resisted 
relentlessly by de Gaulle, who put forward his own concept of a far more 
intricate, if less elevated, set of relationships. Both concepts reflected 
their countries’ histories and values. Kennedy’s was an updating of the 
legacies of Wilson and Franklin Delano Roosevelt; de Gaulle’s was an 
intricate version of classical European equilibrium based on a divided 
Germany, West German economic preponderance, French political domi- 
nance of the European Community; and America’s nuclear protection as 
a form of insurance. 

Yet, when all was said and done, de Gaulle was defeated by the very 
emphasis on old-fashioned national interest that he had so powerfully 
evoked Wise statesmanship does not overreach. De Gaulle’s brilliant 
analysis was vitiated by his failure to take into account that the French 
national interest was not compatible with driving disagreements with the 
United States to a point where America might dissociate from Europe — 
at least while the Soviet Union was still intact. France had the capacity to 


616 



Concepts of Western Unity 


thwart American designs here and there, but it was at no point strong 
enough to impose its own. 

Whether de Gaulle disregarded this truth or was too proud to acknowl- 
edge it, he frequently transposed essentially philosophical propositions 
into an assault on American intentions, as if sowing systematic distrust 
within the Alliance were the essence of French policy. In the process, de 
Gaulle frustrated his own design. His proposition that the decision on 
war and peace is, in the deepest sense, political was true enough. And his 
Directorate idea correctly called attention to the imperative to concert 
political purposes, especially outside the area covered by the Atlantic 
Alliance. 

Yet de Gaulle tended to carry valid arguments to self-defeating ex- 
tremes. It was one thing for him to reject structures which rendered 
agreement obligatory and sought to prevent autonomous action by proce- 
dural means, and quite another to conduct Atlantic relations in the form 
of permanent confrontation between Europe and America. His high- 
handed tactics ran too counter to the way Americans conceive of interna- 
tional relations, especially alliances, and was incompatible with the atti- 
tudes of the other members of NATO that, driven to choose between 
Washington and Paris, would always opt for the former. 

This was particularly true with respect to France’s relations with Ger- 
many. De Gaulle had made Franco-German cooperation the linchpin of 
his foreign policy. But although he had Germany’s support for his Berlin 
policies and considerable sympathy for his views on nuclear control, 
there was a limit beyond which no German statesman would or could go 
in dissociating from the United States. Whatever their misgivings about 
individual American policies, German leaders had no desire to be left 
facing the Soviet Union with the sole backing of France. Regardless of 
how German leaders assessed the relative merits of the Anglo-American 
positions on the issues of nuclear control and European integration, none 
of them could possibly prefer reliance on the small French forces over 
America’s vast nuclear arsenal, or on France’s political backing over that 
of the United States. There was, therefore, an inherent limit to what de 
Gaulle was able to accomplish by taking an anti-American course; his 
efforts to prevent the emergence of a nationalistic Germany ran the risk 
of tempting German nationalism to maneuver among its various options. 

It was a peculiarity of the crises of the 1960s that they always ran into 
the sand. After the Berlin crisis of 1958-63, there were no more frontal 
Soviet challenges to Western interests in Europe. After the Atlantic crises 
of 1960-66, NATO issues subsided to a peaceful coexistence between the 
American and French conceptions. During the 1970s, the Nixon Adminis- 


617 



Diplomacy 


tration, in its “Year of Europe," sought to revive some of the spirit of 
Kennedy’s approach on the basis of more modest proposals. It foundered 
on the old rock of Gaullist opposition, and for much the same reasons. 
From time to time, France tried to create a truly independent European 
military capability, but American reserve and German ambivalence kept 
these plans from becoming significant. As the decades passed, both the 
American and the French approaches were overtaken by events. 

Ironically, in the post-Cold War world, the two adversaries now find 
themselves in an environment in which their ultimate cooperation has 
become the key to a creative Atlantic and European relationship. The 
Wilsonian vision of a community of democratic states operating on the 
basis of a common purpose and a division of labor was appropriate to 
the international order of the 1950s and 1960s, characterized as it was by 
the overriding external threat of a totalitarian ideology and of America’s 
nuclear near-monopoly and economic superiority. But the disappearance 
of a single, unifying threat and the ideological collapse of communism, 
together with a more even distribution of economic strength, impose on 
the international order the need for a more subtle balancing of national 
and regional interests. Communism did collapse, as Kennan, Acheson, 
and Dulles had predicted. Yet, waiting at the end of that road was not a 
world of Wilsonian idealism but a virulent form of the very nationalism 
Wilson and his disciples had labeled as “old-fashioned." De Gaulle would 
not have been astonished by this new world. No doubt he would hardly 
have considered it “new" at all. He would have argued that it had been 
there all along, only thinly veiled by the transitory phenomenon of two- 
power hegemony. 

At the same time, the collapse of communism and the unification of 
Germany have also overthrown most of de Gaulle’s assumptions. Skepti- 
cal about everything except his own country’s international role, de 
Gaulle overestimated France’s capacity to manage the historical processes 
all by itself. The “new world order" has proved no more hospitable to de 
Gaulle’s dream of French political predominance in Europe than it has to 
America’s unchallenged global leadership. A unified Germany no longer 
needs its allies’ certification of superior legitimacy vis-a-vis the East Ger- 
man rival. With the Soviet Union’s erstwhile Eastern European satellites 
now also players in the game, France finds itself lacking the strength to 
organize a new European equilibrium all by itself. France’s traditional 
option of containing Germany by seeking rapprochement with Russia is 
precluded by both of the foreseeable outcomes to the evolution of the 
former Soviet Union: if it ends in chaos and disarray, Russia will be too 
weak to act as a counterweight to Germany; if Russian nationalism prevails 


618 



Concepts of Western Unity 


and recentralization occurs, the new state, still possessing thousands of 
nuclear weapons, might be too strong to serve as a French partner. Nor 
is it a foregone conclusion that such a state would opt for France. It would 
surely find an American or a German option at least as tempting. Above 
all, any attempt to encircle Germany would reawaken the very national- 
ism its leaders have so far managed to lay to rest, and which has been 
France’s continuing nightmare. America thus remains France’s most reli- 
able, if conceptually most difficult, partner, as well as the only reinsurance 
available for its necessary policy of friendship with Germany. 

So, at the end of the road which de Gaulle had originally designed to 
make America dispensable, and which America had hoped would inte- 
grate France more fully into NATO, cooperation between these two long- 
time friendly adversaries — something like America’s special relationship 
with Great Britain — has emerged as a key to the equilibrium, just as it 
should have when, two generations earlier, Wilson had appeared in 
France to liberate the Old World from its follies and to raise its sights 
beyond the nation-state. 


619 




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 

Vietnam: 

Entry into the Morass; 
Truman and Eisenhower 

It all began with the best of intentions. For two decades after the end of 
the Second World War, America had taken the lead in building a new 
international order out of the fragments of a shattered world. It had 
rehabilitated Europe and restored Japan, faced down Communist expan- 
sionism in Greece, Turkey, Berlin, and Korea, entered into its first peace- 
time alliances, and launched a program of technical assistance to the 
developing world. The countries under the American umbrella were en- 
joying peace, prosperity, and stability. 

In Indochina, however, all the previous patterns of America’s involve- 
ment abroad were shattered. For the first time in America’s twentieth- 
century international experience, the direct, almost causal, relationship 


Vietnam: Entry into the Morass,- Truman and Eisenhower 


the nation had always enjoyed between its values and its achievements 
began to fray. The too universal application of their values caused Ameri- 
cans to begin questioning those values and why they should have brought 
them into Vietnam in the first place. A chasm opened between the Ameri- 
cans’ belief in the exceptional nature of their national experience and the 
compromises and ambiguities inherent in the geopolitics of containing 
communism. In the crucible of Vietnam, American exceptionalism turned 
on itself. American society did not debate, as others might have, the 
practical shortcomings of its policies but America’s worthiness to pursue 
any international role. It was this aspect of the Vietnam debate that pro- 
duced wounds which have proved so painful and so difficult to heal. 

Rarely have the consequences of a nation’s actions turned out to be so 
at variance with their original intent. In Vietnam, America lost track of the 
basic principle of foreign policy that Richelieu had put forward three 
centuries earlier: . . the thing that is to be supported and the force that 
is to support it should stand in geometrical proportion to each other” 
(see chapter 3). A geopolitical approach geared to an analysis of national 
interest would have differentiated between what was strategically signifi- 
cant and what was peripheral. It would have asked why America had 
thought it safe to stand by in 1948, when the communists conquered the 
huge prize of China, yet identified its national security with a much 
smaller Asian country that had not been independent for 150 years and 
had never been independent in its current borders. 

When, in the nineteenth century, Bismarck, the arch-practitioner of 
Realpolitik, found his two closest allies, Austria and Russia, at loggerheads 
over the turmoil in the Balkans, which lay a few hundred miles from 
Germany’s frontiers, he made it clear that Germany would not go to war 
over Balkan issues; to Bismarck, the Balkans were, in his own words, not 
worth the bones of a single Pomeranian grenadier. The United States did 
not base its calculations on a similar algebra. In the nineteenth century, 
President John Quincy Adams, a shrewd foreign policy practitioner, had 
warned his countrymen against venturing abroad in pursuit of “distant 
monsters.” Yet the Wilsonian approach to foreign policy permitted no 
distinction to be made among the monsters to be slain. Universalist in its 
approach to world order, Wilsonianism did not lend itself to an analysis 
of the relative importance of various countries. America was obliged to 
fight for what was right, regardless of local circumstances, and indepen- 
dent of geopolitics. 

During the course of the twentieth century, one president after another 
proclaimed that America had no “selfish” interests; that its principal, if 
not its only, international goal was universal peace and progress. In this 


621 



Diplomacy 


spirit, Truman, in his inaugural address of January 20, 1949, had grandly 
committed his country to the objective of a world in which “all nations 

and all peoples are free to govern themselves as they see fit ” No 

purely national interest would be pursued: “We have sought no territory. 
We have imposed our will on none. We have asked for no privileges we 
would not extend to others.” The United States would “strengthen free- 
dom-loving nations against the dangers of aggression” by providing “mili- 
tary advice and equipment to free nations which will cooperate with us 
in the maintenance of peace and security.” 1 The freedom of every single 
independent nation had become the national objective, irrespective of 
those nations’ strategic importance to the United States. 

In his two inaugural addresses, Eisenhower took up the same theme in 
even more exalted language. He described a world in which thrones had 
been toppled, vast empires had been swept away, and new nations had 
emerged. Amidst all this turmoil, destiny had entrusted America with the 
charge to defend freedom unconstrained by geographic considerations 
or calculations of the national interest. Indeed, Eisenhower implied that 
such calculations ran counter to the American value system, in which 
all nations and peoples are treated equally: “Conceiving the defense of 
freedom, like freedom itself, to be one and indivisible, we hold all conti- 
nents and peoples in equal regard and honor. We reject any insinuation 
that one race or another, one people or another, is in any sense inferior 
or expendable.” 2 

Eisenhower described America’s foreign policy as not being like that 
of any other nation; it was an extension of America’s moral responsibili- 
ties rather than an outgrowth of a balancing of risks and rewards. The test 
of America’s policies was not so much feasibility — which was taken for 
granted — as worthiness: “For history does not long entrust the care of 
freedom to the weak or the timid.” 3 Leadership was its own reward; 
America’s benefit was defined as the privilege of helping others to help 
themselves. Altruism so conceived could have no political or geographic 
bounds. 

In his only inaugural address, Kennedy carried the theme of America’s 
selflessness and duty to the world even further. Proclaiming his genera- 
tion to be the linear descendant of the world’s first democratic revolution, 
he pledged his Administration, in soaring language, not to “permit the 
slow undoing of those human rights to which this nation has always been 
committed, and to which we are committed today at home and around 
the world. Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we 
shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any 
friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty.” 4 


622 



Vietnam: Entry into the Morass,- Truman and Eisenhower 


The sweeping American global commitment was not related to any spe- 
cific national-security interest and exempted no country or region of the 
world. Kennedy’s eloquent peroration was the reverse of Palmerston’s 
dictum, that Great Britain had no friends, only interests; America, in the 
pursuit of liberty, had no interests, only friends. 

By the time of Lyndon B. Johnson’s inaugural on January 20, 1965, 
conventional wisdom had culminated in the proposition that America’s 
foreign commitments, springing organically from its democratic system 
of government, had erased altogether the distinction between domestic 
and international responsibilities. For America, Johnson asserted, no 
stranger was beyond hope: “Terrific dangers and troubles that we once 
called ‘foreign’ now constantly live among us. If American lives must end, 
and American treasure be spilled, in countries that we barely know, then 
that is the price that change has demanded of conviction and of our 
enduring covenant.” 5 

Much later, it became fashionable to cite such statements as examples 
of the arrogance of power, or as the hypocritical pretexts for America’s 
quest for domination. Such facile cynicism misreads the essence of Amer- 
ica’s political faith, which is at once “naive” and draws from that naivete 
the impetus for extraordinary endeavors. Most countries go to war to 
resist concrete, definable threats to their security. In this century, America 
has gone to war — from World War I to the Persian Gulf War of 1991 — 
largely on behalf of what it perceived as moral obligations to resist aggres- 
sion or injustice as the trustee of collective security. 

This commitment was especially pronounced among the generation of 
American leaders who had in their youth witnessed the tragedy of Mu- 
nich. Burned into their psyches was the lesson that failure to resist aggres- 
sion — wherever and however it occurred — guarantees that it will have 
to be resisted under much worse circumstances later on. From Cordell 
Hull onward, every American secretary of state echoed this theme. It was 
the one point on which Dean Acheson and John Foster Dulles agreed. 6 
Geopolitical analysis of the specific dangers posed by the communist 
conquest of a distant country was deemed subordinate to the twin slogans 
of resisting aggression in the abstract and preventing the further spread 
of communism. The communist victory in China had reinforced the con- 
viction of American policymakers that no further communist expansion 
could be tolerated. 

Policy documents and official statements of the period show that this 
conviction went largely unchallenged. In February 1950, four months 
before the start of the Korean conflict, NSC document 64 had concluded 
that Indochina was “a key area of South East Asia and is under immediate 


623 



Diplomacy 


threat.” 7 The memorandum marked the debut of the so-called Domino 
Theory, which predicted that, if Indochina fell, Burma and Thailand 
would soon follow, and that “the balance of Southeast Asia would then 
be in grave hazard.” 8 

In January 1951, Dean Rusk declared that “to neglect to pursue our 
present course to the utmost of our ability would be disastrous to our 
interests in Indochina and, consequently, in the rest of Southeast Asia.” 9 
In April of the year before, NSC document 68 had concluded that the 
global equilibrium was at stake in Indochina: . . any substantia] further 
extension of the area under the domination of the Kremlin would raise 
the possibility that no coalition adequate to confront the Kremlin with 
greater strength could be assembled.” 10 

But was it really true, as the document implied, that every communist 
gain extended the area controlled by the Kremlin — especially given the 
experience of Titoism? And was it conceivable that the addition of Indo- 
china to the communist camp could, by itself, overthrow the global bal- 
ance of power? Since these questions were not raised, America never 
came to grips with the geopolitical reality that, in Southeast Asia, it was 
reaching the point where global commitment was turning into overexten- 
sion — precisely as Walter Lippmann had cautioned earlier (see chapter 
18 ). 

There were in fact vast differences in the nature of the threat. In Eu- 
rope, the principal threat emanated from the Soviet superpower. In Asia, 
the threat to American interests came from secondary powers which were 
at best surrogates of the Soviet Union and over which Soviet control was 
— or should have been understood to be — questionable. In reality, as the 
Vietnam War evolved, America came to fight the surrogate of a surrogate, 
each of which deeply distrusted the respective senior partner. In the 
American analysis, the global equilibrium was under assault by North 
Vietnam, assumed to be controlled from Beijing, which, in turn, was 
conceived to be controlled by Moscow. In Europe, America was de- 
fending historic states; in Indochina, America was dealing with societies 
that, in their present dimensions, were building states for the first time. 
The European nations had long-established traditions of how to cooper- 
ate in the defense of the balance of power. In Southeast Asia, statehood 
was just emerging, the concept of the balance of power was foreign, and 
there was no precedent of cooperation among the existing states. 

These fundamental differences between the geopolitics of Europe and 
Asia, together with America’s interests in each, were submerged in the 
universalist, ideological American approach to foreign policy. The Czech 
coup, the Berlin blockade, the testing of a Soviet atomic bomb, the corn- 


624 



Vietnam: Entry into the Morass,- Truman and Eisenhower 


munist victory in China, and the communist attack on South Korea were 
all lumped together by America’s leaders into a single global threat — 
indeed, a centrally controlled global conspiracy. Realpolitik would have 
sought to limit the Korean War to the narrowest possible dimension; 
America’s Manichean view of the conflict worked in the opposite direc- 
tion. Endowing Korea with a global significance, Truman had coupled his 
dispatch of American troops with an announcement of a significant in- 
crease in military aid to France in its own war against the communist 
guerrillas in Indochina (then called the Vietminh), and had moved the 
Seventh Fleet to protect Taiwan. American policymakers drew an analogy 
between Germany’s and Japan’s simultaneous assaults in Europe and Asia 
in the Second World War, and Moscow’s and Beijing’s maneuvers in the 
1950s, the Soviet Union replacing Germany, and China standing in for 
Japan. By 1952, a third of the French expenditures in Indochina were 
being subsidized by the United States. 

America’s entry into Indochina introduced a whole new moral issue. 
NATO defended democracies; the American occupation of Japan had im- 
ported democratic institutions to that nation; the Korean War had been 
fought to turn back an assault on the independence of small nations. In 
Indochina, however, the case for containment was initially cast in almost 
exclusively geopolitical terms, making it all the more difficult to incorpo- 
rate into the prevailing American ideology. For one thing, the defense 
of Indochina ran head-on against America’s tradition of anticolonialism. 
Technically still French colonies, the states of Indochina were neither 
democracies nor even independent. Although, in 1950, France had trans- 
formed its three colonies of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia into the “Asso- 
ciated States of the French Union,’’ this new designation stopped well 
short of independence because France feared that, if it granted full sover- 
eignty, it could do no less for its three North African possessions — Tuni- 
sia, Algeria, and Morocco. 

American anticolonial sentiment during World War II had focused on 
Indochina with particular intensity. Roosevelt had disliked de Gaulle and, 
for that matter, was no great admirer of France, especially after its collapse 
in 1940. Throughout the war, Roosevelt had toyed with the idea of turning 
Indochina into a United Nations trusteeship, 11 though he began muting 
this scheme at Yalta. And it was abandoned by the Truman Administration, 
which was eager for French support in the formation of the Atlantic 
Alliance. 

By 1950, the Truman Administration had decided that the security of 
the free world required Indochina to be kept out of communist hands — 
which, in practice, meant bending America’s anticolonial principles by 


625 



Diplomacy 


supporting the French struggle in Indochina. Truman and Acheson saw 
no other choice because the Joint Chiefs of Staff had concluded that 
the American armed forces were stretched to the limit by simultaneous 
commitments to NATO and Korea and that none could be spared for the 
defense of Indochina — even if it were invaded by China. 12 Hence they 
saw no choice except to rely on the French army, which would have to 
resist the Indochinese communists with American financial and logistical 
support. After victory in that struggle, America intended to reconcile its 
strategic and anticolonial convictions by pressing for independence. 

As it turned out, America’s initial commitment to Indochina in 1950 
established the pattern for its future involvement: large enough to get 
America entangled, not significant enough to prove decisive. In the early 
stages of the quagmire, this was largely the result of ignorance about the 
actual conditions and the near-impossibility of conducting operations 
through two layers of French colonial authorities, as well as whatever 
local authorities the so-called Associated States of Vietnam, Laos, and 
Cambodia were permitted to establish. 

Not wanting to be tarred as a party to colonialism, both the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff and the State Department sought to protect their country’s moral 
flank by pressing France to pledge eventual independence. 13 This delicate 
balancing act finally landed in the lap of the State Department, which 
expressed its awareness of the complexities by naming its Indochinese 
program “Operation Eggshell.” The label, unfortunately, conveyed a far 
greater understanding of the predicament than did the content of its 
program advance the solution. The idea was to prod France in the direc- 
tion of granting independence to Indochina while urging it to continue 
waging the anticommunist war. 14 No one explained why France should 
risk lives in a war designed to make its presence in the region dispens- 
able. 

Dean Acheson described the dilemma with characteristic pungency. On 
the one hand, he said, the United States might “lose out” if it continued to 
support France’s “old fashioned colonial attitudes”; on the other, if 
pressed too far, France might simply abdicate altogether with the argu- 
ment: “All right, take over the whole country. We don’t want it.” 15 
Acheson’s “solution” turned out to be a restatement of the contradictions 
of America’s policy: increasing American aid to Indochina while urging 
France and its chosen local ruler, Bao Dai, to “get the nationalists on his 
side.” 16 He put forward no plan for resolving this dilemma. 

By the time the Truman Administration prepared to leave office, eva- 
sion had matured into official policy. In 1952, a National Security Council 
document formalized the Domino Theory and gave it a sweeping charac- 
ter. Describing a military attack on Indochina as a danger “inherent in 


616 



Vietnam: Entry into the Morass,. Truman and Eisenhower 


the existence of a hostile and aggressive Communist China/’ 17 it argued 
that the loss of even a single Southeast Asian country would lead “to 
relatively swift submission to or an alignment with communism by the 
remainder. Furthermore, an alignment with communism of the rest of 
Southeast Asia and India, and in the longer term, of the Middle East (with 
the possible exceptions of at least Pakistan and Turkey) would in all 
probability progressively follow.” 18 

Obviously, if that estimate was realistic, such wholesale collapse was 
bound to endanger the security and stability of Europe as well, and to 
“make it extremely difficult to prevent Japan’s eventual accommodation 
to Communism.” 19 The NSC memorandum offered no analysis of why the 
collapse had to be so automatic or so global. Above all, it failed to explore 
the possibility of establishing a firebreak at the borders of Malaya and 
Thailand, which had far greater stability than Indochina — as favored by 
the British leaders. Nor was the perception of the long-range danger to 
Europe shared by America’s European allies, which, in the years to come, 
consistently refused to participate in the defense of Indochina. 

The analysis that a potential disaster was brewing in Indochina was 
followed by a remedy that was not even remotely equal to the problem 
— indeed, in this case, it was no remedy at all. For stalemate in Korea had 
destroyed — at least for a time — America’s willingness to fight another 
land war in Asia. “We could not have another Korea, we could not put 
ground forces into Indochina,” argued Acheson. It would be “futile and a 
mistake to defend Indochina in Indochina.” 20 This cryptic remark seemed 
to mean that, if Indochina had indeed become the hinge of the global 
equilibrium, and if China was indeed the source of the trouble, America 
would have to attack China itself, at least with air and naval power — 
precisely what Acheson had resolutely resisted with respect to Korea. It 
also left open the question of how America should respond if the French 
and their Indochinese allies were defeated by indigenous communist 
forces rather than by the entry of the Chinese into the war. If Hanoi was 
a Beijing surrogate, and Beijing a proxy of Moscow, as both the Executive 
Branch and the Congress believed, the United States would be forced to 
choose in earnest between its geopolitical and its anticolonial convictions. 

We know today that, soon after winning its civil war, Communist China 
came to consider the Soviet Union as the most serious threat to its inde- 
pendence, and that, historically, Vietnam has had the same fear of China. 
Therefore, a communist victory in Indochina in the 1950s would, in all 
likelihood, have accelerated all these rivalries. That too would have pre- 
sented a challenge to the West, but not that of a centrally managed global 
conspiracy. 

On the other hand, the arguments of the NSC memorandum were not 


627 



Diplomacy 


as shallow as they later appeared. Even in the absence of a central conspir- 
acy, and for all the West knew at the time, the Domino Theory might 
nevertheless have been valid. Singapore’s savvy and thoughtful Prime 
Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, clearly thought so, and he has usually been 
proven right. In the immediate postwar era, communism still possessed 
substantial ideological dynamism. A demonstration of the bankruptcy of 
its economic management was another generation away. Many in the 
democracies, and especially in the newly independent countries, consid- 
ered the communist world to be poised to surpass the capitalist world in 
industrial capacity. The governments of many of the newly independent 
countries were fragile and threatened by domestic insurrection. At the 
very moment the NSC memorandum was prepared, a communist guer- 
rilla war was being waged in Malaya. 

Washington policymakers had good reason to be concerned about the 
conquest of Indochina by a movement which had already engulfed East- 
ern Europe and taken over China. Regardless of whether communist 
expansion was centrally organized, it seemed to possess enough momen- 
tum to sweep the fragile new nations of Southeast Asia into the anti- 
Western camp. The real question was not whether some dominoes might 
fall in Southeast Asia, which was likely, but whether there might not be 
better places in the region to draw the line — for instance, around coun- 
tries where the political and security elements were more in harness, 
such as in Malaya and Thailand. And surely the conclusion of the NSC 
policy statement — that, if Indochina were to fall, even Europe and Japan 
might come to believe in the irreversibility of the communist tide and 
adjust accordingly — went much too far. 

Truman’s legacy to his successor, Dwight D. Eisenhower, was an annual 
military-assistance program to Indochina of some $200 million (some- 
what over $1 billion in 1993 dollars) and a strategic theory in search of a 
policy. The Truman Administration had not been obliged to face the 
potential gap between its strategic doctrine and its moral convictions, or 
to confront the necessity of making a choice between the geopolitical 
rationale and American capabilities: Eisenhower was left with the respon- 
sibility of dealing with the first challenge; Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon 
with the second. 

The Eisenhower Administration did not question America’s commit- 
ment to the security of Indochina, which it had inherited. It sought to 
reconcile its strategic doctrine and its moral convictions by stepping up 
pressures for reform in Indochina. In May 1953 — four months after taking 
the oath of office — Eisenhower urged the American Ambassador to 
France, Douglas Dillon, to press the French to appoint new leaders with 


628 



Vietnam; Entry into the Morass, Truman and Eisenhower 

authority to “win victory” in Indochina, and at the same time to make 
“clear and unequivocal public announcements, repeated as often as may 
be desirable,” that independence would be granted “as soon as victory 
against the Communists had been won .” 21 In July, Eisenhower com- 
plained to Senator Ralph Flanders that the French government’s commit- 
ment to independence was made “in an obscure and roundabout fashion 
— instead of boldly, forthrightly and repeatedly .” 22 

For France, the issue had already gone far beyond political reform. Its 
forces in Indochina were enmeshed in a frustrating guerrilla war, with 
which they had no experience whatsoever. In a conventional war with 
established front lines, superior firepower usually carries the day. By 
contrast, a guerrilla war is generally not fought from fixed positions, and 
the guerrilla army hides among the population. A conventional war is 
about control of territory; a guerrilla war is about the security of the 
population. Since the guerrilla army is not tied to the defense of any 
particular territory, it is in a position to determine the field of battle to a 
considerable extent and to regulate the casualties of both sides. 

In a conventional war, a success rate in battle of 75 percent would 
guarantee victory. In a guerrilla war, protecting the population only 75 
percent of the time ensures defeat. One hundred percent security in 75 
percent of the country is far better than 75 percent security in 100 percent 
of the country. If the defending forces cannot bring about nearly perfect 
security for the population — at least in the area they consider essential — 
the guerrilla is bound to win sooner or later. 

The basic equation of guerrilla war is as simple as it is difficult to 
execute: the guerrilla army wins as long as it can keep from losing; the 
conventional army is bound to lose unless it wins decisively. Stalemate 
almost never occurs. Any country engaging itself in a guerrilla war must 
be prepared for a long struggle. The guerrilla army can continue hit-and- 
run tactics for a long time even with greatly diminished forces. A clear- 
cut victory is very rare; successful guerrilla wars typically peter out over a 
long period of time. The most notable examples of victory over guerrilla 
forces took place in Malaya and Greece, where the defending forces 
succeeded because the guerrillas were cut off from outside supply 
sources (in Malaya by geography, in Greece due to Tito’s break with 
Moscow). 

Neither the French nor the American army, which followed in its foot- 
steps a decade later, ever solved the riddle of guerrilla war. Both fought 
the only kind of war they understood and for which they had been 
trained and equipped — classical, conventional warfare based on clearly 
demarcated front lines. Both armies, relying on superior firepower, 


629 



Diplomacy 


strove for a war of attrition. Both saw that strategy turned against them by 
an enemy who, fighting in his own country, could exhaust them with his 
patience and generate domestic pressures to end the conflict. Casualties 
kept mounting while criteria to define progress remained elusive. 

France conceded defeat more rapidly than America, because its armed 
forces were spread more thinly in their effort to hold all of Vietnam with 
a third of the forces America would eventually commit to defending half 
of the country. France was being whipsawed as America would be a 
decade later: whenever it concentrated its forces around population cen- 
ters, the communists would dominate most of the countryside; when it 
attempted to move out to protect the countryside, the communists would 
attack the towns and the forts, one by one. 

Something about Vietnam consistently blighted the reasoning power 
of foreigners who ventured into it. Bizarrely, the French Vietnam War 
came to a climax at a road junction called Dien Bien Phu, which was 
located in the remote northwestern corner of Vietnam, near the Laotian 
border. France had placed an elite force there in the hope of luring 
the communists into a pitched battle of attrition, and, in the process, 
maneuvered itself into a no-win situation. If the communists chose to 
ignore the French deployment, these forces would be wasted in a posi- 
tion far from areas of any strategic consequence. If the communists took 
the bait, their sole motive had to be the belief that they were within 
sight of decisive victory. France had reduced its options to irrelevance or 
defeat. 

The French vastly underestimated the toughness and the ingenuity of 
their opponents — as the Americans would do a decade later. On March 
13, 1954, the North Vietnamese launched an all-out attack on Dien Bien 
Phu which, already in its initial assault, overran two outlying forts that 
were supposed to dominate the high ground. They did so by using artil- 
lery which they were not even thought to possess, and which had been 
supplied by China in the aftermath of the Korean War. From then on, it 
was only a matter of time before the remainder of the French force would 
be ground down. Exhausted by what had become a war of attrition, and 
seeing little purpose in fighting only to have to withdraw from Indochina 
under American pressure, a new French government accepted a Soviet 
proposal to hold a conference on Indochina to begin that April in Geneva. 

The imminence of this conference caused the communists to step up 
their military pressures and forced the Eisenhower Administration to 
choose between its theories and its possibilities. The fall of Dien Bien 
Phu would oblige France to yield a substantial portion, if not all, of 
Vietnam to the communists. Yet Dien Bien Phu could only be saved by a 


630 



Vietnam: Entry into the Morass, Truman and Eisenhower 


major military escalation for which France had neither the resources nor 
the will. The United States would have to decide whether to back the 
Domino Theory with direct military action. 

When the French Chief of Staff, General Paul Ely, visited Washington 
on March 23, Admiral Arthur Radford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, left him with the impression that he would recommend a massive 
air strike against communist positions around Dien Bien Phu — possibly 
including the use of nuclear weapons. Dulles, however, was far too com- 
mitted to collective security to contemplate such a step without laying 
some diplomatic groundwork for it. In a major speech on March 29, 1954, 
he in effect urged collective military action to save Indochina from the 
communists, using the traditional argument of the anti-appeasement 
school — that failure to act immediately would require much more costly 
actions down the road: 

... the imposition on South East Asia of the political system of commu- 
nist Russia and its Chinese communist ally by whatever means would 
be a grave threat to the whole free community. The United States feels 
that that possibility should not be passively accepted but should be met 
by united action. This might involve serious risks but these risks are far 
less than those that will face us a few years from now if we dare not be 
resolute today 23 

Under the banner of “United Action,” Dulles proposed that a coalition 
composed of the United States, Great Britain, France, New Zealand, Aus- 
tralia, and the Associated States of Indochina be formed to stop the com- 
munist drive in Indochina. Eisenhower joined him in urging collective 
action, though almost certainly to thwart intervention rather than to pro- 
mote it. Sherman Adams, Eisenhower’s Chief of Staff, described the Presi- 
dent’s attitude this way: “Having avoided one total war with Red China 
the year before in Korea, when he had United Nations support, he [Eisen- 
hower] was in no mood to provoke another one in Indochina . . . without 
the British and other Western allies.” 24 

Eisenhower embodied that strange phenomenon of American politics 
by which presidents who appear to be the most guileless often turn out 
to be the most complex. In this sense, Eisenhower was a precursor of 
Ronald Reagan, for he managed to obscure extraordinary manipulative 
skills behind a veneer of warm affability. As he would over Suez two years 
later, and again over Berlin, Dulles’ words implied a hard line — in this 
case, the Radford plan of aerial intervention or some variation of it. Eisen- 
hower’s preference was almost certainly to avoid military action alto- 


63 1 



Diplomacy 


gether. He knew too much about military affairs to believe that a single 
air strike could be decisive, and was reluctant to resort to massive retalia- 
tion (the official strategy) against China. And he had no stomach for a 
prolonged land war in Southeast Asia. Moreover, Eisenhower had had 
enough experience with coalition diplomacy to be aware of the extreme 
unlikelihood of United Action’s being concluded in a time frame relevant 
to the fate of Dien Bien Phu. For Eisenhower, this no doubt provided a 
convenient way out, since he preferred the loss of Indochina to tainting 
America with the charge of being procolonial. As he wrote in an unpub- 
lished passage of his memoirs: 

. . . the standing of the United States as the most powerful of the anti- 
colonial powers is an asset of incalculable value to the Free World. . . . 
Thus it is that the moral position of the United States was more to be 
guarded than the Tonkin Delta, indeed than all of Indochina. 25 

Whatever their private reservations, Dulles and Eisenhower made a major 
effort to bring about United Action. On April 4, 1954, in a long letter, 
Eisenhower appealed to Churchill, who was then in his last year as Prime 
Minister: 

If they [France] do not see it through, and Indochina passes into the 
hands of the Communists, the ultimate effect on our and your global 
strategic position with the consequent shift in the power ratio through- 
out Asia and the Pacific could be disastrous and, I know, unacceptable 
to you and me. It is difficult to see how Thailand, Burma and Indonesia 
could be kept out of Communist hands. This we cannot afford. The 
threat to Malaya, Australia and New Zealand would be direct. The off- 
shore island chain would be broken. The economic pressure on Japan 
which would be deprived of non-Communist markets and sources of 
food and raw material would be such, over a period of time, that it 
is difficult to see how Japan could be prevented from reaching an 
accommodation with the Communist world which would combine the 
manpower and natural resources of Asia with the industrial potential of 
Japan. 26 

Churchill, however, was not persuaded, and Eisenhower made no further 
effort to win him over. Devoted as he was to the “special relationship” 
with America, Churchill was an Englishman first and perceived more 
dangers in Indochina than benefits to be gained. He did not accept the 
proposition that the dominoes would fall quite so inexorably, or that one 
colonial setback would automatically lead to global catastrophe. 


632 



VIETNAM: ENTRY INTO THE MORASS,- TRUMAN AND EISENHOWER 


Churchill and Anthony Eden believed that the best place to defend 
Southeast Asia was at the borders of Malaya; Churchill therefore returned 
the noncommittal response that Eden would convey the Cabinet’s deci- 
sion to Dulles, who was about to leave for London. Churchill’s avoidance 
of substance left little doubt that Great Britain was groping for ways to 
cushion its rejection of United Action. Had the news been favorable, 
Churchill would no doubt have conveyed it himself. Moreover, Eden’s 
dislike of Dulles was proverbial. Even prior to the Secretary of State’s 
arrival, Eden “thought it unrealistic to expect that a victor’s terms could 
be imposed upon an undefeated enemy.” 27 

On April 26, Churchill expressed his reservations personally to Admiral 
Radford, who was visiting London. According to the official record, 
Churchill warned of “war on the fringes, where the Russians were strong 
and could mobilize the enthusiasm of nationalist and oppressed peo- 
ples.” 28 Indeed, there was no political rationale for Great Britain to be- 
come involved in a cause which Churchill described this way: 

The British people would not be easily influenced by what happened 
in the distant jungles of SE Asia; but they did know that there was a 
powerful American base in East Anglia and that war with China, who 
would invoke the Sino-Russian pact, might mean an assault by Hydro- 
gen bombs on these islands. 29 

Above all, such a war would have thwarted the old warrior’s great dream 
of his final year in office — to arrange a summit with the post-Stalin leader- 
ship “calculated to bring home to the Russians the full implications of 
Western strength and to impress upon them the folly of war” 30 (see 
chapter 20). 

By now, enough time had passed that, regardless of Great Britain’s 
decision, United Action could no longer save Dien Bien Phu, which fell 
on May 7 even as the diplomats were discussing Indochina in Geneva. As 
is often the case when collective security is invoked, United Action had 
turned into an alibi for doing nothing. 

The debate over intervention at Dien Bien Phu showed, above all, the 
confusion which was beginning to descend on Vietnam policy and the 
growing difficulty of reconciling geopolitical analysis, strategic doctrine, 
and moral conviction. If it were true that a communist victory in Indo- 
china would cause the dominoes to fall from Japan to Indonesia, as Eisen- 
hower predicted in his letter to Churchill and in a press conference on 
April 7, America would have to draw the line regardless of the reaction of 
other countries, especially since the military contribution of the potential 


633 



Diplomacy 


participants in United Action would have been largely symbolic. Though 
collective action was preferable, it was surely not a precondition to the 
defense of the global balance, if that was indeed what was at stake. On 
the other hand, at about the same time that the Administration was at- 
tempting to organize collective action, it had changed its military doctrine 
to “massive retaliation.” Proposing to strike at the source of aggression, 
in practice, meant that a war over Indochina would be directed against 
China. Yet there was no moral or political basis for air attacks against a 
country that was only indirectly participating in the Vietnam War and for 
a cause which Churchill had characterized to Radford as too peripheral 
and too dangerous to be sustainable for very long in Western public 
opinion. 

Without doubt, the post-Stalinist leaders in the Kremlin would have 
been extremely loath in their first year of power to confront America for 
China’s sake. However, since America’s military leaders were incapable 
of describing either the targets or the likely outcome of massive retalia- 
tion against China (or within Indochina, for that matter), and since Indo- 
china’s independence was still only a plan, no realistic basis for 
intervention existed. Eisenhower wisely deferred a showdown until the 
various strands of the American approach could be harmonized. Unfortu- 
nately, they were still not in harmony a decade later, when America, 
oblivious to the vastness of the enterprise, confidently took up the task at 
which France had failed ignominiously. 

Since both the Soviet Union and China feared American intervention, 
the Eisenhower/Dulles diplomacy of making implicit threats helped to 
bring about an outcome to the Geneva Conference that on the surface 
was far better than the military situation on the ground warranted. The 
Geneva Accords of July 1954 provided for the partitioning of Vietnam 
along the 17th Parallel. To leave the way open for unification, the partition 
was described not as a “political boundary” but as an administrative 
arrangement for facilitating the regrouping of military forces prior to 
internationally supervised elections. These were to be held within two 
years. All outside forces were to be withdrawn from the three Indo- 
chinese states within 300 days; foreign bases and alliances with other 
countries were proscribed. 

Cataloguing the various provisions, however, gives a misleading im- 
pression of the formality and stringency of the Geneva Accords. There 
were many signatories to different parts of the agreement but no con- 
tracting parties, therefore no “collective obligations.” 31 Richard Nixon 
later summed up the hodgepodge as follows: “Nine countries gathered at 
the conference and produced six unilateral declarations, three bilateral 
cease-fire agreements, and one unsigned declaration.” 32 


634 



Vietnam. Entry into the Morass,- Truman and Eisenhower 


What it all amounted to was a way of ending the hostilities, partitioning 
Vietnam, and leaving the political outcome to the future. Amateur analysts 
often invoke the ambiguity of such agreements as a demonstration of the 
confusion or the duplicity of the negotiators — a charge later leveled 
against the 1973 Paris Peace Accords. Yet, most of the time, ambiguous 
documents such as the Geneva Accords reflect reality; they settle what it 
is possible to settle, in the full knowledge that further refinement must 
await new developments. Sometimes the interlude permits a new political 
constellation to emerge without conflict; sometimes the conflict breaks 
out again, forcing each party to review its bidding. 

In 1954, an uneasy stalemate developed which none of the parties was 
as yet in a position to break. The Soviet Union was not prepared for 
confrontation so soon after Stalins death and had only marginal national 
interests in Southeast Asia; China feared another war with America less 
than a year after the end of the Korean conflict (especially in light of the 
new American doctrine of massive retaliation); France was in the process 
of withdrawing from the region; the United States lacked both a strategy 
and the public support for intervention; and the Vietnamese communists 
were not yet strong enough to continue the war without outside sources 
of supply. 

At the same time, nothing that was achieved at the Geneva Conference 
changed the basic views of the protagonists. The Eisenhower Administra- 
tion had not altered its conviction that Indochina was the key to the Asian 
—and perhaps the global — balance of power; nor had it permanently 
abjured military intervention, only intervention at the side of colonial 
France. North Vietnam had not abandoned its objective of unifying all of 
Indochina under communist rule, for which its leaders had been fighting 
for two decades. The new Soviet leadership continued to avow its com- 
mitment to the international class struggle. In terms of doctrine, China 
was the most radical of the communist countries, though, as was learned 
decades later, it generally filtered its ideological convictions through the 
prism of its own national interest. And Chinas perception of its national 
interest caused it to be deeply ambivalent about having a major power, 
even a communist one, on its southern border — the inevitable result of 
Indochina’s unification under communist rule. 

Dulles maneuvered skillfully through this thicket. Almost certainly he 
preferred military intervention and the destruction of communism, even 
in the North. For example, on April 13, 1954, he stated that the only 
“satisfactory” outcome would be a complete withdrawal of the commu- 
nists from Indochina. 33 Instead, he found himself at a conference whose 
only possible outcome would be to give communist rule in North Viet- 
nam an air of legitimacy which, in turn, would expand communist influ- 


635 



Diplomacy 


ence throughout Indochina. With all the bearing of “a puritan in a house 
of ill repute,” 34 Dulles tried to construct a settlement which, though 
“something we would have to gag about,” would also be “free of the taint 
of French colonialism.” 35 For the first time in the course of America’s 
involvement in Vietnam, strategic analysis and moral conviction coin- 
cided. Dulles defined the American goal as assisting in “arriving at deci- 
sions which will help the nations of that area peacefully to enjoy territorial 
integrity and political independence under stable and free governments 
with the opportunity to expand their economies.” 36 

The immediate difficulty, of course, was that the United States had 
refused to participate officially at the Geneva Conference. It tried to be 
both present and absent — sufficiently on the scene to uphold its princi- 
ples, yet far enough to the side to avoid domestic obloquy for having to 
abandon some of them. America’s ambiguity was best expressed in a 
concluding statement which declared that the United States “takes note” 
of the final declarations and would “refrain from the threat or the use of 
force to disturb them.” At the same time, the statement warned that “it 
would view any renewal of the aggression in violation of the aforesaid 
arrangements with grave concern and as seriously threatening interna- 
tional peace and security.” 37 I know of no other instance in diplomatic 
history of a nation guaranteeing a settlement it has refused to sign, and 
about which it has expressed such strong reservations. 

Dulles had not been able to prevent the communist consolidation of 
North Vietnam, but he hoped to prevent the dominoes from falling in the 
rest of Indochina. Faced by what he and Eisenhower perceived as the 
twin evils of colonialism and communism, he had jettisoned French colo- 
nialism and would henceforth be free to concentrate on containing com- 
munism. He viewed the virtue of Geneva to be its creation of a political 
framework which brought America’s political and military objectives into 
harmony and provided the legal basis for resisting further communist 
moves. 

For their part, the communists were preoccupied with establishing 
their system of government north of the 17th Parallel, a task they pursued 
with characteristic savagery, killing at least 50,000 people and putting 
another 100,000 into concentration camps. Some 80,000-100,000 com- 
munist guerrillas moved north, while 1 million North Vietnamese fled to 
South Vietnam, where the United States discovered in Ngo Dinh Diem a 
leader it thought it could support. He had an unblemished record as a 
nationalist; unfortunately, devotion to democracy proved not to be his 
forte. 

Eisenhower’s wise decision not to become involved in Vietnam in 1954 
proved to be tactical, not strategic. After Geneva, he and Dulles remained 


636 



Vietnam: Entry into the Morass,- Truman and Eisenhower 


convinced of Indochina’s decisive strategic importance. While Indochina 
sorted itself out, Dulles put the finishing touches on the collective security 
framework that had misfired earlier in the year. The Southeast Asian 
Treaty Organization (SEATO), which came into being in September 1954, 
was composed, in addition to the United States, of Pakistan, the Philip- 
pines, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and France. 
What it lacked was a common political objective or a means for mutual 
support. Indeed, the countries refusing to participate in SEATO were 
more significant than its members. India, Indonesia, Malaya, and Burma 
preferred to seek safety in neutrality, and the Geneva Accords prohibited 
the three Indochinese states from joining. As for America’s European 
allies, France and Great Britain were not likely to run risks on behalf of 
an area from which they had so recently been ejected. Indeed, France — 
and to a lesser degree Great Britain — almost certainly joined SEATO in 
order to gain a veto over what they considered the potential for rash 
American actions. 

The formal obligations contained in SEATO were rather nebulous. Re- 
quiring the signatories to meet a “common danger” by their “constitu- 
tional processes,” the Treaty neither established criteria for defining the 
common danger nor assembled the machinery for common action — as 
NATO did. Nevertheless, SEATO served Dulles’ purpose by providing a 
legal framework for the defense of Indochina. This is why, strangely 
enough, SEATO was more specific about communist aggression against 
the three nations of Indochina — barred from membership by the Geneva 
Accords — than with respect to a communist attack on the signatories. A 
separate protocol designated threats to Laos, Cambodia, and South Viet- 
nam as being inimical to the peace and security of the signatories, in 
effect providing a unilateral guarantee. 38 

Everything now depended on whether the new states of Indochina, 
especially South Vietnam, could be turned into fully functioning nations. 
None of them had ever been governed as a political entity within its 
existing borders. Hue was the old imperial capital. The French had di- 
vided Vietnam into three regions — Tonkin, Annam, and Cochinchina — 
governed by Hanoi, Hue, and Saigon respectively. The area around Sai- 
gon and in the Mekong Delta had only been colonized by the Vietnamese 
relatively recently, during the nineteenth century, at about the same time 
that the French arrived. The existing authorities consisted of a combina- 
tion of French-trained civil servants and a maze of secret societies — the 
so-called sects — some of which had religious affiliations, but all of which 
supported themselves and maintained their autonomous status by shak- 
ing down the population. 

Diem, the new ruler, was the son of an official at the imperial court of 


637 



Diplomacy 


Hue. Educated in Catholic schools, he had for a few years served as an 
official in the colonial administration in Hanoi but resigned when the 
French refused to implement some of his proposed reforms. He spent 
the next two decades as a scholar-recluse in his own country or in exile 
abroad — mostly in America — refusing offers from the Japanese, the com- 
munists, and the French-supported Vietnamese leaders to participate in 
their various governments. 

Leaders of so-called freedom movements are typically not democratic 
personalities; they sustain themselves through years of exile and prison 
with visions of the transformation they will bring about once they seize 
power. Humility is rarely one of their attributes; if it were, they would 
not be revolutionaries. Installing a government that makes its leader dis- 
pensable — the essence of democracy — strikes most of them as a contra- 
diction in terms. Leaders of independence struggles tend to be heroes, 
and heroes do not generally make comfortable companions. 

Diems personality traits were compounded by the Conffician political 
tradition of Vietnam. Unlike democratic theory, which views truth as 
emerging from a clash of ideas, Confucianism maintains that truth is 
objective and can only be discerned by assiduous study and education of 
which only a rare few are thought to be capable. Its quest for truth does 
not treat conflicting ideas as having equal merit, the way democratic 
theory does. Since there is only one truth, that which is not true can 
have no standing or be enhanced through competition. Confucianism is 
essentially hierarchical and elitist, emphasizing loyalty to family, institu- 
tions, and authority. None of the societies it has influenced has yet pro- 
duced a functioning pluralistic system (with Taiwan in the 1990s coming 
the closest). 

In 1954, there was little foundation in South Vietnam for nationhood, 
and even less for democracy. Yet neither America s strategic assessment 
nor its belief that South Vietnam had to be saved by democratic reform 
took account of these realities. With the enthusiasm of the innocent, the 
Eisenhower Administration hurled itself headlong into the defense of 
South Vietnam against communist aggression and the task of nation-build- 
ing in the name of enabling a society whose culture was vastly different 
from Americas to maintain its newfound independence and to practice 
freedom in the American sense. 

Dulles had urged backing Diem all along, on the ground that he was 
“the only horse available.” In October 1954, Eisenhower made a virtue 
out of necessity by writing to Diem with a promise of aid contingent on 
standards of “performance ... in undertaking needed reforms.” American 
assistance would be “combined with” an independent Vietnam that was 


638 



Vietnam: Entry into the Morass, Truman and Eisenhower 


“endowed with a strong Government ... so responsive to the nationalist 
aspirations of its people” as to command both domestic and international 
respect. 39 

For a few years, everything seemed to fall into place. By the end of the 
Eisenhower Administration, the United States had given South Vietnam 
over $1 billion in aid; 1,500 American personnel were in South Vietnam; 
the United States embassy in Saigon became one of the largest missions 
in the world. The United States Military Advisory Group, containing 692 
members, had ignored the limits on foreign military personnel estab- 
lished by the Geneva Accords. 40 

Against all expectations and with massive American intelligence sup- 
port, Diem suppressed the secret societies, stabilized the economy, and 
managed to establish central control — astonishing achievements which 
were well received in the United States. After a visit to Vietnam in 1955, 
Senator Mike Mansfield reported that Diem represented “genuine nation- 
alism” and had taken “what was a lost cause of freedom and breathed 
new life into it.” 41 Senator John F. Kennedy endorsed the twin pillars of 
America’s Vietnam policy, security and democracy, describing Vietnam 
not just as the “keystone of the arch” of security in Southeast Asia but as 
“a proving ground for democracy in Asia.” 42 

Events soon revealed that America had been celebrating a lull in com- 
munist pressure, not a permanent achievement. America’s assumption 
that its own unique brand of democracy was readily exportable turned 
out to be flawed. In the West, political pluralism had thrived among 
cohesive societies where a strong social consensus had been in place 
long enough to permit tolerance for the opposition without threatening 
the survival of the state. But where a nation has yet to be created, opposi- 
tion may appear as a threat to national existence, especially when there 
is no civil society to provide a safety net. In these conditions, the tempta- 
tion is strong, often overwhelming, to equate opposition with treason. 

All of these tendencies become magnified in a guerrilla war. For the 
guerrillas’ strategy is to undermine systematically whatever cohesion the 
governing institutions have managed to achieve. In Vietnam, guerrilla 
activity had never ceased, and in 1959 it moved into high gear. The 
guerrillas’ initial goal is to prevent the consolidation of stable, legitimate 
institutions. Their favorite targets are the worst and the best government 
officials. They attack the worst in order to win popular sympathies by 
“punishing” corrupt or oppressive officials; and they attack the best be- 
cause it is the most effective way of preventing the government from 
achieving legitimacy and of discouraging an effective national service. 

By I960, some 2,500 South Vietnamese officials were being assassinated 


639 



Diplomacy 


every year . 43 Only a small number of the most highly motivated, and a 
much larger percentage of the most corrupt, would run such risks. In 
the contest between nation-building and chaos, between democracy and 
repression, the guerrilla enjoyed a huge advantage. Even if Diem had 
been a reformer on the American model, it is questionable whether he 
could have won the unequal race between the time scale needed for 
reform and the time scale sufficient for bringing about chaos. To be sure, 
even if his country had not been enmeshed in a guerrilla war, Diem 
would not have proven to be a significantly more democratic leader. A 
mandarin, he held as a model the Confucian ruler governing by virtue, 
not consensus, and who achieved legitimacy, the so-called mandate of 
heaven, by success. Diem recoiled instinctively from the concept of a 
legitimate opposition, as have all Chinese-style leaders from Beijing to 
Singapore and nearly all of the leaders of Southeast Asia facing much less 
severe domestic difficulties. For a while, Diem’s achievements in nation- 
building obscured the lagging pace of democratic reform. However, as 
security within South Vietnam deteriorated, the latent conflicts between 
American values and South Vietnamese traditions were bound to deepen. 

Despite the American-sponsored buildup of the South Vietnamese 
army, the security situation steadily worsened. The American military was 
motivated by the same self-assurance which characterized the American 
political reformers. Both were convinced that they had somehow discov- 
ered the infallible remedy for success in a strife-ridden country geograph- 
ically and culturally remote from the United States. They went about the 
business of creating a Vietnamese army as a replica of their own. The 
American armed forces were geared to combat in Europe; their only 
experience in the developing world had been in Korea, where their 
task had been to fight a conventional army crossing an internationally 
recognized demarcation line amidst a generally supportive population, a 
situation very similar to what military planners had anticipated would 
happen in Europe. But in Vietnam, the war lacked well-defined front 
lines; the enemy, supplied from Hanoi, defended nothing and attacked 
indiscriminately; he was at once everywhere and nowhere. 

From the moment the American military establishment arrived in Viet- 
nam, it began applying its familiar method of warfare: attrition relying on 
firepower, mechanization, and mobility. All these methods were inappli- 
cable to Vietnam. The American-trained South Vietnamese army soon 
found itself in the same trap as France’s expeditionary force a decade 
earlier. Attrition works best against an adversary who has no choice ex- 
cept to defend a vital prize. But guerrillas rarely have a prize they must 
defend. Mechanization and organization into divisions caused the Viet- 


640 



Vietnam: Entry into the Morass ; Truman and Eisenhower 


namese army to become nearly irrelevant to the struggle for its own 
country. 

In those early days of America’s involvement in Vietnam, the guerrilla 
war was still in its infancy, and the military problem was not yet dominant. 
It therefore seemed as if genuine progress were being made. Not until 
the very end of the Eisenhower Administration did Hanoi throw the 
guerrilla war into high gear, and it would still be some time before the 
North Vietnamese were able to set up a logistics system for supplying a 
major guerrilla war. In order to accomplish this, they invaded Laos, a 
small, peaceful, and neutral nation, through which they constructed what 
later became known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail 
As Eisenhower prepared to leave office, Laos was in fact his main 
concern. In Waging Peace , he described that country as the linchpin of 
the “Domino Theory”: 

... the fall of Laos to Communism could mean the subsequent fall- 
like a tumbling row of dominoes — of its still-free neighbors, Cambodia 
and South Vietnam and, in all probability, Thailand and Burma. Such a 
chain of events would open the way to Communist seizure of all South- 
east Asia. 44 

Eisenhower considered the independence of Laos so crucial that he was 
prepared to “fight . . . with our allies or without them.” 45 Defending Laos 
was to be the most specific recommendation he made to President-elect 
Kennedy during the transition period prior to January 1961. 

As the administrations were changing, the level and the nature of Amer- 
ica’s involvement in Indochina were not yet of a scale that staked Amer- 
ica’s global credibility beyond the point of repair. The American effort 
still bore some relation to regional security objectives; and it was not 
yet of a magnitude that the act of vindicating it would provide its own 
justification. 

The Domino Theory had become conventional wisdom and was rarely 
challenged. But like Wilsonianism itself, the Domino Theory was not so 
much wrong as it was undifferentiated. The real issues posed by Vietnam 
were not whether communism should be resisted in Asia, but whether 
the 17th Parallel was the right place to draw the line; not what would 
happen in Indochina if the South Vietnamese domino fell, but whether 
another defense line could be drawn, say, at the borders of Malaya. 

That issue was never carefully examined in terms of geopolitics. Mu- 
nich having been the seminal lesson of that generation of American lead- 
ers, retreat was considered as compounding the difficulties and, above 


641 



Diplomacy 


all, as being morally wrong. This, in fact, was how Eisenhower defended 
the American involvement in 1959: 

. . . our own national interests demand some help from us in sustaining 
in Viet-Nam the morale, the economic progress, and the military 
strength necessary to its continued existence in freedom — [T]he costs 
of continuous neglect of these problems would be far more than we 
must now bear — indeed more than we could afford. 46 

America’s universalist tradition simply would not permit it to differentiate 
among the potential victims on the basis of strategic expediency. When 
American leaders invoked their nation’s selflessness, it was because they 
genuinely believed in it; they were more likely to defend a country to 
vindicate principle than on grounds of the American national interest. 

By choosing Vietnam as the place to draw the line against communist 
expansionism, America ensured that grave dilemmas would lie ahead. If 
political reform was the way to defeat the guerrillas, did their growing 
power mean that American recommendations were not being correctly 
applied, or that these recommendations were simply not relevant, at least 
at that stage of the struggle? And if Vietnam was indeed as important to 
the global balance as nearly all of America’s leaders were asserting, did it 
not mean that geopolitical necessities would, in the end, override all 
others and oblige America to take over a war 12,000 miles from home? 
The answers to these questions were left to Eisenhower’s successors, 
John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. 


642 



CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX 

Vietnam: 

On the Road to Despair; 
Kennedy and Johnson 

As the third consecutive president obliged to deal with Indochina, John 
F. Kennedy inherited a set of well-established policy premises. Like his 
predecessors, Kennedy considered Vietnam a crucial link in America’s 
overall geopolitical position. He believed, as had Truman and Eisen- 
hower, that preventing a communist victory in Vietnam was a vital Ameri- 
can interest. And, like his predecessors, he viewed the communist 
leadership in Hanoi as a surrogate of the Kremlin. In short, Kennedy 



Diplomacy 


agreed with the two previous administrations that defending South Viet- 
nam was essential to the overall strategy of global containment. 

Although Kennedy’s Vietnam policy was in many ways a continuation 
of Eisenhower’s, there were important differences. Eisenhower had 
viewed the conflict the way a soldier would — as a war between two 
distinct entities, North and South Vietnam. To the Kennedy team, the 
Vietcong attacks on South Vietnam did not represent a traditional war so 
much as a quasi-civil conflict characterized by the relatively new phenom- 
enon of guerrilla warfare. The Kennedy team’s preferred solution was for 
the United States to build South Vietnam into a nation — socially, politi- 
cally, economically, and militarily — so that it could defeat the guerrillas 
without risking American lives. 

At the same time, the Kennedy team interpreted the military aspect of 
the conflict in even more apocalyptic terms than had its predecessors. 
Whereas Eisenhower had seen the military threat to Vietnam through the 
prism of conventional warfare, the Kennedy team believed — prematurely 
as it turned out — that a nuclear stalemate already existed between the 
United States and the Soviet Union which made general war, in the words 
of Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, unthinkable. The Administra- 
tion was convinced that its military buildup would remove the commu- 
nists’ opportunity to wage Korean-type limited wars. By a process of 
exclusion, it came to consider guerrilla warfare as the wave of the future 
and resistance to it the ultimate test of America’s ability to contain com- 
munism. 

On January 6, 1961, two weeks before Kennedy’s inauguration, Khru- 
shchev described “wars of national liberation” as “sacred” and pledged 
Soviet support for them. Kennedy’s young New Frontier treated this 
pledge as a declaration of war against its hope of giving new emphasis to 
America’s relations with the developing world. Today Khrushchev’s 
speech is widely perceived as having been aimed primarily at his ideolog- 
ical tormentors in Beijing, who were accusing him of lapsed Leninism 
because he had just extended the Berlin ultimatum a third time, and 
because of his oft-expressed reservations about nuclear war. At the time, 
however, Kennedy, in his first State of the Union Address on January 31, 
1961, treated Khrushchev’s speech as proof of the Soviet Union’s and 
China’s “ambitions for world domination — ambitions which they force- 
fully restated only a short time ago.” 1 

In September 1965, the same misunderstanding would occur during 
the Johnson Administration with respect to China, when Chinese Defense 
Minister Lin Piao’s manifesto on “People’s War” spoke grandly of “encir- 
cling” the world’s industrial powers by revolutions throughout the Third 


644 



VIETNAM: On THE ROAD TO DESPAIR 


World. 2 The Johnson Administration interpreted this as a warning that 
China might intervene in Hanoi, ignoring Lin’s subtext, which stressed 
the need for self-reliance among revolutionaries. Reinforced by Mao’s 
comment that Chinese armies did not go abroad, it was meant as well to 
provide a strong hint that China did not intend to become involved again 
in communist wars of liberation. Apparently both sides in the Korean War 
had learned the same lesson; they were determined not to repeat it. 

The Kennedy and Johnson administrations’ interpretations of commu- 
nist pronouncements caused Indochina to be no longer perceived as one 
battle among many in the Cold War. To the New Frontier, Indochina 
represented the decisive battle that would determine whether guerrilla 
war could be stopped and the Cold War won. Kennedy’s interpretation of 
the conflict as a coordinated global conspiracy caused him to conclude 
that Southeast Asia was the place to restore his credibility after he had 
been browbeaten by Khrushchev at the Vienna Summit of June 1961: 
“[N]ow we have a problem,” he told James Reston, who was then the 
leading columnist of The New York Times, “in trying to make our power 
credible, and Vietnam looks like the place.” 3 

As in a classical tragedy in which the hero is led step by imperceptible 
step to his destiny by seemingly random events, the Kennedy Administra- 
tion’s entry into Vietnam was by way of a crisis from which its predeces- 
sors had been spared — the future of Laos. Few peoples have less 
deserved the suffering that befell them than the gentle, peace-loving Lao- 
tians. Wedged between forbidding mountain ranges that face Vietnam 
and the broad Mekong River, which marks the border with Thailand, the 
peoples of Laos asked nothing of their bellicose neighbor except to be 
left alone. That was one wish, however, that North Vietnam never granted 
them. Once Hanoi had launched its guerrilla war in South Vietnam in 
1959, pressures on Laos inevitably increased. Had Hanoi tried to supply 
the guerrilla forces in the South through Vietnamese territory, it would 
have had to infiltrate across the so-called Demilitarized Zone, the demar- 
cation line dividing Vietnam which extended for about forty miles along 
the 17th Parallel. That distance could have been sealed off by the South 
Vietnamese army with American support. Or else the North Vietnamese 
would have had to launch an attack by organized military units across the 
17th Parallel, which would almost certainly have triggered American and 
perhaps SEATO intervention — something Hanoi appeared unwilling to 
risk until 1972, quite late in the Vietnam War. 

By the cold-blooded logic that marked communist strategy during the 
entire war, Hanoi concluded that infiltration into South Vietnam via neu- 
tral Laos and Cambodia would involve fewer international penalties than 


645 



Diplomacy 


an overt thrust across the 17th Parallel. Even though the neutrality of Laos 
and Cambodia had been guaranteed by the Geneva Accords of 1954 and 
reaffirmed by the SEATO Treaty, Hanoi made its judgment stick. In effect, 
it annexed the panhandle of sovereign Laos and established base areas 
both there and in Cambodia without significant opposition from the 
world community. Indeed what passed for world opinion fell in with 
Hanoi’s bizarre reasoning: it was American and South Vietnamese efforts 
to interrupt the vast infiltration network on neutral soil that became 
castigated as “expansions” of the war. 

The panhandle of Laos provided the North Vietnamese with access 
routes under a jungle canopy of some 650 miles along the entire border 
of South Vietnam with Laos and Cambodia. Over 6,000 North Vietnamese 
troops moved into Laos in 1959 with the ostensible mission of supporting 
the communist Pathet Lao, who, since the Geneva Accords of 1954, had 
been imposed by Hanoi in the northeastern provinces along the Vietnam- 
ese border. 

As a military man, Eisenhower understood that the defense of South 
Vietnam had to begin in Laos. He apparently told Kennedy during the 
transition that he was prepared to intervene in Laos, if necessary unilater- 
ally. Kennedy’s first statements on Laos were consistent with Eisenhower’s 
recommendations. At a press conference on March 23, 1961, he warned: 
“The security of all Southeast Asia will be endangered if Laos loses its 
neutral independence. Its own safety runs with the safety of us all — in a 
real neutrality observed by all.” 4 Yet, when presenting his new defense 
policy only five days later, Kennedy insisted that “the basic problems 
facing the world today are not susceptible to a military solution.” 5 Though 
not entirely inconsistent with a decision to defend Laos, this statement 
was not exactly a clarion call to military action. Hanoi never had any 
illusions that it was at war, and it would use all the means at its disposal 
to win it. Kennedy was more ambiguous. He hoped to prevail to contain 
the communists through political means and by compromise if at all 
possible. 

In April 1961, shaken by the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy decided against 
intervention, choosing instead to rely on negotiations to buttress Laotian 
neutrality. Once the threat of American intervention was removed, negoti- 
ations on neutrality were certain to confirm Hanoi’s stranglehold. As a 
matter of fact, it was the second time that Hanoi was selling Laotian 
neutrality, having already undertaken to respect it at the Geneva Confer- 
ence in 1954. 

While developing the logistics network which was later dubbed the Ho 
Chi Minh Trail, the North Vietnamese stalled the negotiations for a year. 


646 



VIETNAM: On THE ROAD TO DESPAIR 


Finally, in May 1962, Kennedy sent Marines to neighboring Thailand. This 
brought a rapid conclusion to the negotiations. All foreign troops and 
advisers were required to be withdrawn from Laos through international 
checkpoints. Every Thai and American adviser left as scheduled; of the 
over 6,000 North Vietnamese military personnel who had moved into 
Laos, exactly forty (yes, forty) departed through international checkpoints. 
As for the remainder, Hanoi brazenly denied that they were even there. 
The road to South Vietnam now lay wide open. 

Eisenhower turned out to have been right. If Indochina were indeed 
the keystone of American security in the Pacific, as the leaders in Washing- 
ton had claimed for over a decade, Laos was a better place to defend it 
than Vietnam; indeed, it was perhaps the only place to defend Indochina. 
Even though Laos was a remote and landlocked country, the North Viet- 
namese, as feared and hated foreigners, could not have waged a guerrilla 
war on its soil. America could have fought there the sort of conventional 
war for which its army had been trained, and Thai troops would almost 
certainly have supported American efforts. Faced with such prospects, 
Hanoi might well have pulled back to await a more propitious moment 
for full-scale war. 

So cold-blooded a strategic analysis, however, was deemed inappropri- 
ate for a conflict still perceived largely in ideological terms. (Nor was it 
my own view at the time.) For a decade, American leaders had been 
making a case for defending Vietnam because it represented a key ele- 
ment in an Asian defense concept; to revise that strategy by suddenly 
designating a remote and backward mountain kingdom as the linchpin of 
the Domino Theory might have disrupted the domestic consensus. 

For all these reasons, Kennedy and his advisers concluded that Indo- 
china had to be defended in South Vietnam, where communist aggression 
had some meaning for Americans, regardless of the fact that they had just 
made a decision which made that task nearly impossible militarily. For 
not only did the supply routes through Laos lie open, but the crafty, 
mercurial ruler of Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk, decided that the game 
was up and acquiesced in the establishment of communist base areas all 
along Cambodia’s border with South Vietnam. Thus was set up yet an- 
other Catch-22 situation: if the Cambodian base areas were left undis- 
turbed, the North Vietnamese could attack the South and withdraw into 
safety for rest and refitting, making the defense of South Vietnam unman- 
ageable; if the base areas were attacked, South Vietnam and its allies 
would be pilloried for committing “aggression” against a “neutral” coun- 
try. 

Faced with a crisis over Berlin, his reluctance to risk war in Laos, on 


647 



Diplomacy 


the border of China, and in a country of which not 1 percent of the 
American public had ever heard, was understandable. The alternative, to 
abandon Indochina altogether, was never considered. Kennedy was loath 
to reverse a decade of bipartisan commitment, especially in the wake of 
the Bay of Pigs. Withdrawal would also have meant accepting defeat in 
what was viewed as a test case for overcoming the new communist strat- 
egy of guerrilla warfare. Above all, Kennedy believed the advice he was 
receiving, namely that American help would enable the South Vietnamese 
military forces to defeat the communist guerrillas. In those innocent days, 
no leading American of either party had the least suspicion that America 
was heading into a quagmire. 

Kennedy had a record of public comment on Indochina that extended 
over a decade. As early as November 1951, he had struck the theme he 
would never abandon: force alone was not enough to stop communism; 
Americas allies in that struggle had to build a political foundation for it. 

To check the southern drive of Communism makes sense but not only 
through reliance on the force of arms. The task is rather to build strong 
native non-Communist sentiment within these areas and rely on that as 
a spearhead of defense rather than upon the legions of General de 
Lattre [French commander in Indochina]. 6 

In April 1954, during Dulles’ United Action campaign to save Dien Bien 
Phu, Kennedy, in a Senate speech, opposed intervention so long as Indo- 
china remained a French colony. 7 By 1956, after France had withdrawn 
and South Vietnamese independence had been achieved, Kennedy was 
ready to join the prevailing orthodoxy: “This is our offspring — we cannot 
abandon it.” At the same time, he reiterated that the conflict was not so 
much a military as a political and moral challenge “in a country where 
concepts of free enterprise and capitalism are meaningless, where pov- 
erty and hunger are not enemies across the 17th parallel but enemies 
within their midst. . . . What we must offer them is a revolution — a politi- 
cal, economic and social revolution far superior to anything the Commu- 
nists can offer.” Nothing less than America’s credibility was at stake: “And 
if it falls victim to any of the perils that threaten its existence — Commu- 
nism, political anarchy, poverty and the rest — then the United States, with 
some justification, will be held responsible; and our prestige in Asia will 
sink to a new low.” 8 

The trick, Kennedy seemed to be saying, was to make the victim less 
prone to aggression. That approach was to spawn a new concept not 
previously found in the diplomatic vocabulary, which is still with us today 


648 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


— the notion of “nation-building.” Kennedy’s preferred strategy was to 
strengthen the South Vietnamese so that they could themselves resist the 
communists. Civic action and domestic reform were emphasized and 
the official rhetoric was modified to suggest that American prestige and 
credibility, not necessarily American security, were on the line in Viet- 
nam. 

Each new administration obliged to deal with Indochina seemed to 
become more deeply drawn into the morass. Truman and Eisenhower 
had established the military-assistance program; Kennedy’s emphasis on 
reform led to growing American involvement in the internal politics of 
South Vietnam. The problem was that reform and nation-building in 
South Vietnam would take decades to bear fruit. In Europe in the 1940s 
and 1950s, America had bolstered established countries with strong politi- 
cal traditions by extending Marshall Plan aid and by means of the NATO 
military alliance. But Vietnam was a brand-new country and had no insti- 
tutions to build upon. The central dilemma became that America’s politi- 
cal goal of introducing a stable democracy in South Vietnam could not be 
attained in time to head off a guerrilla victory, which was America’s strate- 
gic goal. America would have to modify either its military or its political 
objectives. 

When Kennedy entered office, the guerrilla war in South Vietnam had 
reached a level of violence sufficient to prevent the consolidation of the 
Ngo Dinh Diem government without as yet raising doubts about its sur- 
vival. This seeming plateau of guerrilla activity tempted the Kennedy 
Administration into the illusion that a relatively small additional effort 
could achieve complete victory. The temporary lull, however, was due 
primarily to Hanoi’s preoccupation with Laos; it turned out to be the calm 
before the storm. Once the new supply routes through Laos were opened, 
the guerrilla war in the South began to accelerate again, and America’s 
dilemmas grew progressively insoluble. 

The Kennedy Administration embarked on its journey into the Vietnam- 
ese morass in May 1961 with a mission to Saigon by Vice President John- 
son in order to “assess” the situation. Such missions almost invariably 
signal that a decision has already been reached. No vice president is in a 
position to make an independent judgment about a decade-old guerrilla 
war in a visit of two or three days. Though his access to intelligence and 
reporting cables is usually extensive (depending on the president), he 
does not have staffs adequate for extensive analysis, and none for follow- 
up. Vice presidential overseas missions are generally designed to stake 
American prestige, or to supply credibility for decisions that have already 
been made. 


649 



Diplomacy 


Johnson’s trip to Vietnam was a textbook example of these rules. Before 
announcing the mission, Kennedy met with Senator J. William Fulbright, 
Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and warned him 
that American troops might have to be sent to Vietnam and Thailand. 
Senator Fulbright promised to be supportive, provided that the countries 
concerned had themselves requested assistance. 9 Fulbright’s was a classi- 
cally American reaction. A Richelieu, Palmerston, or Bismarck would have 
asked what national interest was being served. Fulbright was more con- 
cerned with America’s legal and moral position. 

Concurrent with Johnson’s departure, a National Security Council di- 
rective dated May 11 established the prevention of communist domina- 
tion of South Vietnam as an American national objective. The strategy was 
“to create in that country a viable and increasingly democratic society” 
through military, political, economic, psychological, and covert actions. 10 
Containment was turning into nation-building. 

Johnson reported that the greatest danger in Indochina was not the 
communist challenge— which, for unexplained reasons, he described as 
“momentary” — but hunger, ignorance, poverty, and disease. Johnson as- 
sessed Diem as admirable but “remote” from his people; America’s only 
choice, he said, was between backing Diem and pulling out. 11 South 
Vietnam could be saved provided the United States moved quickly and 
decisively. Johnson did not explain how the United States could eradicate 
hunger, poverty, and disease in a time frame relevant to the pace of 
guerrilla warfare. 

Having enunciated the principle, the Administration was next obliged 
to establish a policy. Yet, for the next three months, it was preoccupied 
with the Berlin crisis. By the time it could turn again to Vietnam, in the 
fall of 1961, the security situation had deteriorated to a point where it 
could only be alleviated by some kind of American military intervention. 

General Maxwell Taylor, the President’s military adviser, and Walt Ros- 
tow, Director of the State Department Policy Planning Staff, were sent to 
Vietnam to develop an appropriate policy. Unlike the Vice President, 
Taylor and Rostow were members of Kennedy’s inner circle of advisers; 
like Johnson, they had well-established views on America’s Vietnam policy 
before they had even left Washington. The real purpose of their mission 
was to determine the scale and the manner in which America should 
increase its commitment. 

As it turned out, Taylor and Rostow recommended a massive increase 
in the American advisory role at all levels of the Vietnamese administra- 
tion. A so-called military logistics force of 8,000 men was to be dispatched, 
ostensibly to assist with flood control in the Mekong Delta but equipped 


650 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


with enough combat support to defend itself; a substantial increase in the 
number of civilian advisers was part of the recommendation. 

The result was in fact a compromise between those in the Kennedy 
Administration who wanted to confine American participation in Vietnam 
to an advisory role and those who favored the immediate introduction of 
combat troops. The latter school was far from unanimous about what the 
mission of American combat troops ought to be; they were at one only in 
vastly underestimating the magnitude of the problem. Acting Assistant 
Secretary of Defense William Bundy estimated that the introduction of up 
to 40,000 combat troops, as recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
had a 70 percent chance of “ arresting things.” 12 Since guerrilla war knows 
no halfway point between victory and defeat, “arresting things” would, 
of course, merely postpone the debacle while staking Americas global 
credibility. Bundy presciently added that what he described as a 30 per- 
cent chance of failure would involve an outcome such as France had 
suffered in 1954. At the same time, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara 
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff estimated that victory would require 205,000 
Americans if Hanoi and Beijing intervened overtly. 13 As it turned out, this 
was less than half of the number of troops America ultimately committed 
to fight Hanoi alone. 

Bureaucratic compromise often reflects the subconscious hope that 
something will happen in the interim to cause the problem to resolve 
itself. But in the case of Vietnam, there was no conceivable basis for 
such a hope. With the official estimates ranging between 40,000 men for 
stalemate and 205,000 men for victory, the Kennedy Administration had 
to view the commitment of 8,000 troops as either woefully inadequate or 
as a first installment in an ever greater American role. And while odds of 
70 percent for “arresting things” might seem attractive, they needed to 
be weighed against the global impact of a disaster such as that France had 
suffered. 

The momentum was clearly all in the direction of further increases, 
since Kennedy had not changed his assessment of what was at stake. On 
November 14, 1961, he told his staff that the United States' reaction to 
communist “aggression” would be “examined on both sides of the Iron 
Curtain ... as a measure of the administration’s intentions and determina- 
tion.” If America chose to negotiate rather than to send reinforcements, 
it might “in fact be judged weaker than in Laos.” 14 He rejected a proposal 
from Chester Bowles and Averell Harriman for a “negotiation” to imple- 
ment the Geneva Accords of 1954, a euphemism for abandoning the effort 
in South Vietnam. 

But if negotiation was rejected and reinforcement was treated as inevi- 


651 



Diplomacy 


table, an open-ended American commitment could only be avoided if 
Hanoi backed off. That, however, would have required massive, not incre- 
mental, reinforcement, assuming it was achievable at all. America was not 
prepared to grasp the nettle that the real choice was total commitment or 
withdrawal, and that the most dangerous course was gradual escalation. 

Unfortunately, graduated escalation was the fashion of the day. De- 
signed to stop aggression without excessive application of force, it had 
the broader purpose of preventing military planning from running away 
with political decisions, as had happened on the eve of World War I. 
Graduated response was conceived originally as a strategy in nuclear war 
— incrementally escalating and thereby avoiding a total holocaust. When 
applied to guerrilla warfare, however, it ran the risk of inviting open- 
ended escalation. Each limited commitment involved the danger of being 
interpreted as inhibition rather than resolve, thereby encouraging the 
adversary to continue his climb along the ladder of escalation; time 
enough to settle, he might reason, when and if the risks in fact became 
intolerable. 

Closer attention to the historical record would have indicated that the 
leaders in Hanoi were not about to be discouraged by esoteric American 
strategic theories, that they had a genius for overcoming Western technol- 
ogy, and that democracy was neither one of their objectives nor a system 
they admired. The joys of peaceful construction held no temptation for 
these hardened veterans of French solitary confinement and decades of 
guerrilla war. The American version of reform evoked their contempt. 
They had fought and suffered all their lives to establish a united, commu- 
nist Vietnam and to expel foreign influence. Revolutionary war was their 
sole profession. If America had searched the world over, it could not have 
found a more intractable adversary. 

The American objective, according to Roger Hilsman, who was then 
Director of the State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research, 
was to reduce the Vietcong to “hungry, marauding bands of outlaws 
devoting all their energies to staying alive.” 15 But what guerrilla war in 
history offered a precedent for such an outcome? In Malaya, it had taken 
80,000 British and twice that number of Malayan troops some thirteen 
years to defeat an opponent numbering no more than 10,000 who had 
no significant outside support or secure lines of communication, and few 
opportunities of adding to its numbers. In Vietnam, the guerrilla army 
numbered in the tens of thousands, and the North had organized itself as 
the rear area for the struggle, had built base areas along hundreds of 
miles of border, and retained the permanent option of intervening with 
an experienced North Vietnamese army whenever the guerrilla army 
came under too much pressure. 


652 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


America had maneuvered itself into what could at best be a stalemate 
according to the Bundy estimate’s requirement of 40,000 troops, of which 
it was still well short. When Kennedy took office, the number of American 
military personnel in Vietnam was close to 900. By the end of 1961, it had 
risen to 3,164; by the time Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, the figure 
was at 16,263, with more in the pipeline. In I960, the number of Ameri- 
cans dead was 3; in 1961, 16; in 1963, 123; and in 1964, the last peacetime 
year before American combat units were committed, the number had 
risen to more than 200. The military situation, however, had not signifi- 
cantly improved. 

The more America’s military role in South Vietnam expanded, the more 
America emphasized political reform. And, the more insistent Washington 
became on domestic change, the more it Americanized the war. In his 
first defense review, on March 28, 1961, Kennedy restated his central 
theme: that, no matter how powerful America’s strategic weapons were, 
it could nevertheless be nibbled away slowly at the peripheries “by forces 
of subversion, infiltration, intimidation, indirect or non-overt aggression, 
internal revolution, diplomatic blackmail, guerrilla warfare” 36 — dangers 
which could, in the end, only be overcome by political and social reform 
enabling the potential victims to help themselves. 

The Kennedy Administration took for a truism what would turn out 
to be one of Indochina’s many insoluble dilemmas; the insistence on 
simultaneous political reform and military victory set up a vicious circle. 
Within wide limits, the guerrillas were in a position to determine the 
intensity of warfare, and hence the level of security which was, in 
the short run, quite independent of the pace of reform. The greater the 
insecurity, the more heavy-handed the Saigon government was likely to 
become. And as long as Washington considered guerrilla successes the 
result, even in part, of lagging reform, Hanoi could maneuver in a way 
that would magnify American pressures on the Saigon government it was 
seeking to undermine. Trapped between fanatical ideologues in Hanoi 
and inexperienced idealists in Washington, Diem’s government froze into 
rigidity and was eventually ground down. 

Even a political leader less shaped by mandarin traditions than Diem 
would have found it daunting to build a pluralistic democracy amidst a 
guerrilla war and in a society fragmented by regions, seas, and clans. A 
credibility gap was inherent in America’s entire enterprise, not so much 
because America’s leaders deceived the public but because they deceived 
themselves about their capabilities, including the ease with which familiar 
institutions could be transferred to other cultures. Basically, the Kennedy 
Administration was implementing Wilsonian assumptions. Just as Wilson 
had believed that American notions about democracy and diplomacy 


653 



Diplomacy 


could be grafted onto Europe in the form of the Fourteen Points, so 
the Kennedy Administration sought to give the Vietnamese essentially 
American rules by which to govern themselves. If despots in the South 
could be deposed and good democrats installed, the conflict raging in 
Indochina would surely subside. 

Every new American administration sought to make increased aid to 
Vietnam conditional on reform. Eisenhower had done so in 1954; Ken- 
nedy was even more insistent in 1961, linking a massive increase of aid 
to the United States’ being granted an advisory role on all levels of 
government. Predictably, Diem refused; leaders of independence strug- 
gles rarely see merit in tutelage. Senator Mansfield, visiting Vietnam at 
the end of 1962, reversed his own earlier judgment (see chapter 25) and 
agreed that the Diem government “appears more removed from, rather 
than closer to, the achievement of popularly responsible and responsive 
government.” 17 

That judgment was correct. Yet the key question was to what extent 
these conditions were due to the inadequacies of the government, to a 
cultural gap between Vietnam and America, or to the depredations of the 
guerrillas. Relations between the Administration and Diem deteriorated 
throughout 1963. Media reporting from Saigon, which until then had 
been supportive of America’s involvement, turned hostile. The criticisms 
did not question American objectives, as they would later, but the feasibil- 
ity of bringing about a democratic, noncommunist South Vietnam in asso- 
ciation with a repressive leader like Diem. Diem was even suspected of 
considering compromise with Hanoi — the very course which, a few years 
later, a subsequent South Vietnamese President, Nguyen Van Thieu, 
would be condemned for rejecting. 

The final break with Saigon was provoked by a conflict between the 
South Vietnamese Buddhists and Diem, whose government had issued an 
edict prohibiting the flying of flags by sects, religious groups, or political 
parties. Implementing the order, troops fired at protesting Buddhist dem- 
onstrators, killing several of them in Hue on May 8, 1963. The protesters 
had real grievances which were soon taken up by the international media 
— though the lack of democracy was not one of them. The Buddhists, 
who were as authoritarian as Diem, refused to state any terms to which 
Diem might have responded, had he been so inclined. Ultimately, the 
issue was not democracy so much as power. Paralyzed by the guerrilla 
war and by its own inadequacies, the Diem government refused to make 
concessions. Washington multiplied its pressure on Diem to do so, and 
urged the removal of his brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, who was in charge of 
the security forces, a demarche which Diem interpreted as a power play 


654 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


to leave him at the mercy of his enemies. The final breach occurred on 
August 21, when Nhu’s agents raided a number of pagodas and arrested 
1,400 monks. 

On August 24, newly arrived Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge was in- 
structed to demand Nhu’s removal and to warn Diem that, if he refused, 
the United States must “face the possibility that Diem himself cannot be 
preserved.” 18 Saigon’s military leaders were to be put on formal notice 
that future American aid depended on the removal of Nhu, something 
Lodge’s Vietnamese interlocutors understood to mean that Diem had to 
be overthrown. Kennedy and McNamara subsequently repeated essen- 
tially the same demands publicly. Lest the generals failed to appreciate 
the hint, they were told that the United States would provide them with 
“direct support in any interim period of breakdown of central govern- 
ment mechanism.” 19 It took the South Vietnamese generals nearly two 
months to gather their courage and to act on proddings by their insistent 
ally. Finally, on November 1, they overthrew Diem, killing him and Nhu 
in the process. 

By encouraging Diem’s overthrow, America cast its involvement in 
Vietnam in concrete. Ultimately, every revolutionary war is about govern- 
mental legitimacy; undermining it is the guerrillas’ principal aim. Diem’s 
overthrow handed that objective to Hanoi for free. As a consequence of 
Diem’s feudal style of government, his removal affected every tier of civil 
administration down to the village level. Authority now had to be rebuilt 
from the ground up. And history teaches this iron law of revolutions: the 
more extensive the eradication of existing authority, the more its succes- 
sors must rely on naked power to establish themselves. For, in the end, 
legitimacy involves an acceptance of authority without compulsion; its 
absence turns every contest into a test of strength. Prior to the coup, there 
had always existed, at least in theory, the possibility that America would 
refuse to become directly involved in military operations, much as Eisen- 
hower had done when he pulled back from the brink over Dien Bien 
Phu nearly a decade earlier. Since the coup had been justified to facilitate 
a more effective prosecution of the war, withdrawal disappeared as a 
policy option. 

Diem’s removal did not unify the people behind the generals, as Wash- 
ington had hoped. Though The New York Times hailed the coup as an 
opportunity “toward repulsing further Communist inroads throughout 
Southeast Asia,” 20 the opposite occurred. The underpinning of a pluralis- 
tic society is consensus on underlying values, which implicitly sets a 
limit to the claims of competing individuals or groups. In Vietnam, that 
consensus had been weak to begin with. The coup destroyed the struc- 


655 



Diplomacy 


ture that had been built up over a decade, leaving in its place a group of 
competing generals without political experience or political following. 

During 1964 alone, seven more changes of government took place, 
none of which brought about a semblance of democracy, and all of which 
were the results of coups of one kind or another. Diem’s successors, 
lacking his prestige as a nationalist and as a mandarin-style father figure, 
had little choice but to turn the war over to the Americans. In the wake 
of Diem’s overthrow, it has been justly argued that “the question was not 
going to be how to encourage a regime in South Vietnam that America 
could support, but of finding one that would support her in keeping up 
the struggle against the jubilant Communists.” 21 

The power brokers in Hanoi grasped their opportunity immediately. A 
Communist Party Central Committee meeting in December 1963 laid 
down the new strategy: guerrilla units would be strengthened, and infil- 
tration into the South accelerated. Most important, North Vietnamese 
regular units would be introduced: “It is time for the North to increase 
aid to the South, the North must bring into further play its role as the 
revolutionary base for the whole nation.” 22 Soon thereafter, the 323th 
North Vietnamese regular division began moving into the South. Before 
the coup, infiltration from the North had consisted largely of Southerners 
who had been regrouped in 1954; afterward, the percentage of Northern- 
ers rose steadily until, after the Tet Offensive of 1968, nearly all the 
infiltrators were North Vietnamese. With the introduction of regular 
North Vietnamese army units, both sides crossed their Rubicons. 

Shortly after Diem’s overthrow, Kennedy was assassinated. The new 
President, Lyndon Baines Johnson, interpreted intervention by regular 
North Vietnamese units as a classic case of overt aggression. The differ- 
ence was that Hanoi was implementing a strategy while Washington 
merely had competing theories, none of which was pressed to its conclu- 
sions. 

Suspended between its yearning for a nonmilitary victory and its fore- 
boding of a military disaster, America faced a tragic quandary. On Decem- 
ber 21, 1963, McNamara reported to the new President that the security 
situation within South Vietnam had become very disturbing. America 
could no longer avoid facing the choice which had been implicit all 
along: dramatic escalation of its military involvement or the collapse of 
South Vietnam. The Kennedy Administration had feared entering the war 
on the side of an undemocratic ally; the Johnson Administration feared 
abandoning the new, undemocratic Saigon government more than it did 
participation in the war. 

In retrospect, the last moment at which America could have withdrawn 


656 



VIETNAM: ON THE ROAD TO DESPAIR 


from Vietnam at tolerable — though still heavy — cost would have been 
either just before or just after Diem was overthrown. The Kennedy Ad- 
ministration was correct in its assessment that it could not win with Diem. 
The Johnson Administration deluded itself into believing that it could win 
with his successors. In light of what followed the coup, it would have 
been easier for America to disengage by letting Diem collapse of his 
own inadequacies or, at a minimum, by not standing in the way of the 
negotiations he was suspected of planning with Hanoi. Kennedy had been 
analytically correct to reject any such scheme on the ground that it would 
inevitably lead to a communist takeover. The problem was that America 
was prepared neither to face the implications of the remedy nor to accept 
the probable outcome of letting matters run their course. 

Some former members of the Kennedy Administration have argued 
that, after the 1964 presidential election, their President intended to with- 
draw the American forces, which were still being augmented. Others at 
least as well placed have denied this. All one can say at this remove about 
Kennedy’s ultimate intention is that each successive reinforcement to 
Vietnam made his choices more stark, and the consequences of either 
commitment or withdrawal more painful and costly. And with each pass- 
ing month, America’s stakes were raised further, first only militarily but 
soon in terms of America’s international standing as well. 

Kennedy’s assassination made America’s extrication from Vietnam even 
more difficult. If indeed Kennedy had felt the sting of realization that 
America had embarked on an unsustainable course, he needed to reverse 
only his own decision; Johnson, on the other hand, would have had to 
jettison the apparent policy of a revered, fallen predecessor. This was 
especially the case as none of the advisers he inherited from Kennedy 
made the recommendation to disengage (with the notable exception of 
Undersecretary of State George Ball, who, however, was not in the inner 
circle). It would have taken a leader of truly extraordinary self-confidence 
and knowledge to undertake a retreat of such magnitude so soon after 
taking office. And when it came to foreign policy, Johnson was extremely 
unsure of himself. 

In retrospect, the new President would have done well to undertake 
an analysis of whether the military and political objectives on behalf of 
which America had already invested so much were attainable, by what 
means, and over what period of time — indeed, of whether the premises 
which had generated these commitments were even correct. Aside from 
the fact that Johnson found the sophisticated aides whom he had inher- 
ited from Kennedy unanimously in favor of trying to win in Vietnam 
(again, with the exception of George Ball), it is doubtful that, if any 


657 



Diplomacy 


such analysis had been made, the outcome would have been significantly 
different. McNamaras Defense Department and Bundy’s White House 
staffs were gluttons for analysis. Both were men of extraordinary intelli- 
gence. What they lacked was criteria to assess a challenge so at variance 
with the American experience and American ideology. 

America’s initial motivation in involving itself had been that the loss of 
Vietnam would lead to the collapse of noncommunist Asia and to Japan’s 
accommodation to communism. In terms of that analysis, in defending 
South Vietnam, America was fighting for itself, regardless of whether 
South Vietnam was democratic or could ever be made so. Such an analy- 
sis, however, was too geopolitical and power-oriented for Americans, 
and was soon overtaken by Wilsonian idealism. One administration after 
another had attempted a dual task, each part of which alone would have 
been difficult to achieve by itself: the defeat of a guerrilla army with 
secure bases all around an extended periphery, and the democratization 
of a society with no tradition of pluralism. 

In the cauldron of Vietnam, America was to learn that there are limits 
to even the most sacrosanct beliefs, and was forced to come to terms with 
the gap which can arise between power and principle. Precisely because 
America was reluctant to accept lessons so contrary to its historical experi- 
ence, it also found cutting its losses extraordinarily difficult. Thus the pain 
associated with both these frustrations was the result of its best not its 
worst qualities. America’s rejection of national interest as the basis of 
foreign policy had cast the country adrift on a sea of undifferentiated 
moralism. 

In August 1964, a presumed North Vietnamese attack on the cruiser 
Maddox led to an American retaliatory strike against North Vietnam that 
was endorsed nearly unanimously by the Senate via the so-called Gulf of 
Tonkin Resolution. This resolution was used in turn to justify retaliatory 
air raids a few months earlier. In February 1965, an attack on an American 
advisers’ barracks in the Central Highland city of Pleiku triggered an 
American retaliatory raid on North Vietnam, which quickly turned into a 
systematic bombing campaign code-named ‘‘Rolling Thunder.” By July 
1965, American combat units were fully committed, and the American 
troop presence began to grow, reaching 543,000 by early 1969. 

Subsequently, the issue of whether the Johnson Administration had 
been entirely candid with the American people about the attack on the 
Maddox became part of the increasingly acrimonious Vietnam debate. It 
was used to discredit both the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and America’s 
participation in combat. To be sure, the Tonkin Resolution was not based 
on a full presentation of the facts, even allowing for the confusion of 


658 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


combat. But neither was it a major factor in America’s commitment to 
ground combat in Vietnam. Rather, it was a small step along a road 
which would have brought America to the same destination, given the 
convictions of all the leading personalities. 

The methods used to achieve the Tonkin Resolution would not be 
possible today, and American democracy is the better for it. At the same 
time, neither Johnson’s tactics nor his candor was significantly different 
from Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s when he had edged America toward 
involvement in the Second World War — for example, Roosevelt’s not 
altogether candid account of the torpedoing of the destroyer Greer , the 
pretext for engaging America in a naval war in the Atlantic in 1941. In 
each case, a president was defining unilaterally what America would not 
tolerate: German victory in the 1940s; the takeover of Indochina in the 
1960s. Both presidents were prepared to put their country’s military 
forces in harm’s way and to respond should harm indeed befall them, as 
was likely. In each case, the ultimate decision to enter the war was based 
on considerations which went far beyond the immediate incidents. 

The nightmare of Vietnam was not the way in which America entered 
the war, but why it did so without a more careful assessment of the likely 
costs and potential outcomes. A nation should not send half a million of 
its young to a distant continent or stake its international standing and 
domestic cohesion unless its leaders can describe their political goals 
and offer a realistic strategy for achieving them — as President Bush did 
later in the Gulf War. Washington should have asked itself two basic 
questions: Was it possible to establish democracy and achieve military 
victory more or less simultaneously? And even more crucial, will the 
benefits justify the costs? The presidents or presidential advisers who 
committed America to ground combat in Vietnam took an affirmative 
answer for granted. 

The successful conduct of a guerrilla war requires the subtle blending 
of military and political strategies. American military leaders, however, 
have never been comfortable with gearing military to political objectives. 
Throughout the Vietnam War, the means were insufficient for the stated 
objectives, and objectives were only achievable — if at all — by risks which 
Washington was not prepared to run. 

One of the principal lessons of the Korean War ought to have been that 
protracted, inconclusive wars shatter America’s domestic consensus. Yet 
Washington seemed to have gleaned exactly the opposite lesson: that the 
source of frustration in Korea had been MacArthur’s advance to the Yalu 
and his quest for all-out victory. In this light, the outcome of the Korean 
War was reinterpreted into the success of having prevented a Chinese 


659 



Diplomacy 


victory. America’s involvement in Vietnam became consciously confined 
to a similar goal: without triggering Chinese intervention, to demonstrate 
to North Vietnam that it would not be permitted to take over South 
Vietnam and that, therefore, its only choice was negotiation. But negotia- 
tion for what ends — especially in light of an enemy who equated compro- 
mise with defeat? America’s leaders had surely forgotten that the last two 
years of the Korean War and the McCarthy period had nearly ripped apart 
an American society impatient with protracted stalemate. 

Theoretically, only two strategies have any chance of prevailing in a 
guerrilla war. One is essentially defensive and seeks to deprive the adver- 
sary of control of the population. This strategy requires establishing 
nearly total security for enough of the population so that the guerrillas’ 
gains among the remainder are not adequate for a coherent political 
base. General Maxwell Taylor seems to have had such a strategy in mind 
when he recommended establishing a series of enclaves protected by 
American forces while the South Vietnamese army sought to prevent 
consolidation of a clearly defined communist zone without trying to hold 
every last district day and night. The second possible strategy was to 
attack targets that the guerrillas had to defend, such as sanctuaries, supply 
depots, and home bases — for example, by interdicting the Ho Chi Minh 
Trail by ground forces and blockading both North Vietnam and the Cam- 
bodian ports servicing the sanctuaries. That strategy — at least conceptu- 
ally — might have produced the relatively rapid war of attrition which 
the American military sought so desperately, and forced a negotiated 
outcome. 

What could not work was the strategy which America in fact adopted: 
the mirage of establishing 100 percent security in 100 percent of the 
country, and seeking to wear down the guerrillas by search-and-destroy 
operations. No matter how large the expeditionary force, it could never 
prove sufficient against an enemy whose supply lines lay outside of Viet- 
nam and who possessed extensive sanctuaries and a ferocious will. At the 
end of 1966, North Vietnamese Prime Minister Pham Van Dong told Har- 
rison Salisbury of The New York Times that, though the United States was 
far stronger militarily, it would lose in the end because more 
Vietnamese than Americans were prepared to die for Vietnam, and to 
fight as long as it might take to outlast the Americans. 23 His assessment 
proved correct. 

Johnson resolutely rejected any “expansion” of the war. Washington 
had convinced itself that the four Indochinese states were separate enti- 
ties, even though the communists had been treating them as a single 
theater for two decades and were conducting a coordinated strategy with 
respect to all of them. Moreover, Washington’s assessment of the overall 


660 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


international context had made it too preoccupied with Chinese interven- 
tion, ignoring Lin Piao’s statement that Chinese armies would not go 
abroad, and which was reiterated by Mao to Edgar Snow, an American 
journalist sympathetic to the Chinese communists: Mao told Snow that 
China had no troops outside its own frontiers and had no intention of 
fighting anybody unless its own territory were attacked . 24 Thus it was that, 
in two separate wars a decade and a half apart, America paid a price for 
not taking Chinese statements seriously: in Korea, it had ignored Chinese 
warnings and marched to the Yalu, triggering Chinese intervention; in 
Vietnam, it disregarded assurances by the Chinese that they would not 
intervene, causing America to reject the only strategy which might have 
brought victory. 

Concerned about Chinese intervention, determined to preserve the 
option of a relaxation of tensions with the Soviet Union, and eager to 
maintain a consensus behind his Great Society domestic program, John- 
son opted for halfway measures which staked America’s international 
position without achieving its stated goals. Trying to reconcile the objec- 
tive of defeating a global conspiracy with the desire to avoid a global 
conflict, American policy managed only to stultify itself. 

Attrition could not work so long as the guerrillas were able to choose 
when and where they would fight. Air operations against North Vietnam 
designed to cause steadily growing pain proved inconclusive because 
the North Vietnamese transportation system was too rudimentary to be 
crippled and too unessential to serve as a neuralgic target. Stalemate 
served Hanoi’s purpose — especially a stalemate which could be confined 
to the territory of South Vietnam and caused heavy American casualties. 
All these frustrations gave rise to growing opposition to the war in 
America — an opposition whose initial rallying point became the cry to 
halt the very bombing campaign which was supposed to bring home to 
Hanoi that it could not win. 

Washington was trying to prove that aggression does not pay and that 
guerrilla war was not going to be the wave of the future. What it failed to 
understand was how its adversary calculated the costs and benefits. John- 
son thought the way out was to demonstrate moderation, to reassure 
Hanoi, and to offer compromise. Yet all of these were qualities much 
more likely to encourage Hanoi to persist and, in the process, to teach 
America that there are no awards for losing with moderation. Johnson 
explained America’s goals this way: 

We are not trying to wipe out North Vietnam. We are not trying to 

change their government. We are not trying to establish permanent 

bases in South Vietnam — 


661 



Diplomacy 


... we are there because we are trying to make the Communists of 
North Vietnam stop shooting at their neighbors ... to demonstrate that 
guerrilla warfare, inspired by one nation against another nation, can 

never succeed [W]e must keep on until the Communists in North 

Vietnam realize the price of aggression is too high — and either agree 
to a peaceful settlement or to stop their fighting — 25 

He wanted the communist leaders in Hanoi to understand that 

. . . the minute you realize that a military victory is out of the question 
and you turn from the use of force, you will find us ready and willing 
to reciprocate. . . . We want an honorable peace in Vietnam. In your 
hands is the key to that peace. You only have to turn it . 26 

Johnson did not deserve the hatred and ridicule which such appeals 
evoked. He was, after all, restating traditional American verities. But nei- 
ther he nor his society had any concepts for understanding an adversary 
who found such reassurances derisory; an adversary, moreover, to whom 
the American definition of compromise sounded like a call for surrender 
in the struggle of a lifetime. 

To the tough, dedicated leaders in Hanoi, the concept of stability had 
no operational meaning. They had spent their adult lives fighting for 
victory, first against France, now against a superpower. In the name of 
communism they had brought incredible suffering to their people. “Leav- 
ing their neighbor alone” was the one thing Hanoi’s leaders were inher- 
ently unable to do. Bismarck had once said that German unity would 
never come about through talk but by “blood and iron,” which was 
precisely Hanoi’s views on Vietnamese unity. 

Americans of all persuasions kept appealing to Hanoi to participate in 
some democratic outcome, and racked their brains to devise workable 
election schemes. Yet none of the staples of American thought on interna- 
tional affairs held the slightest attraction for Hanoi except as tools by 
which to confuse Americans. Having established one of the world’s most 
rigorous dictatorships, the Hanoi Politburo would never accept becoming 
simply one political party among many in the South. Hanoi had no con- 
ceivable incentive to stop using force; after all, it was bound to win as 
long as it did not lose, and it was certainly not losing — indeed, American 
strategy, which explicitly aimed at stalemate, abjured Hanoi’s losing. John- 
son’s offer of a massive reconstruction program open to all, including 
North Vietnam, fell on deaf ears . 27 Hanoi wanted victory, not development 
aid, and, with characteristic arrogance, acted as if there was no need to 
choose between the two. 


662 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


Once the tide of American public opinion turned against the war, 
Johnson’s critics blamed him ever more stridently for the diplomatic 
stalemate. Insofar as these charges implied that Johnson was reluctant to 
negotiate, they missed the point. Johnson’s eagerness to start negotiations 
was palpable to the point of being self-defeating. And it convinced Hanoi 
that procrastination was likely to elicit even more generous offers. John- 
son ordered one bombing pause after another (he reports sixteen in 
his memoirs), leaving no doubt that the United States would pay an 
unreciprocated entrance price to get the negotiations started; Hanoi had 
every incentive to make that price as high as possible. 

I was involved in one of the initiatives that illustrated both the Johnson 
Administration’s eagerness to negotiate and Hanoi’s skill at using that 
eagerness to serve its own ends. My own involvement with Vietnam 
evolved quite gradually. Throughout the 1950s, my thinking on foreign 
policy had been focused on Europe and on nuclear strategy. The Kennedy 
Administration included many individuals whom I admired, and I was 
favorably disposed toward its effort in Indochina without giving the issue 
much thought. I first began thinking seriously about Vietnam after three 
visits to that country, in 1965 and 1966, as a consultant on pacification to 
Ambassador Lodge. These occasions gave me an opportunity to travel to 
many of the provinces of South Vietnam and to hold discussions with the 
so-called provincial reporters of the American embassy — an extraordi- 
narily able and devoted group of young foreign service officers in various 
districts around the country. These visits convinced me that the war could 
not be won by the prevailing strategy, and that America would need to 
extricate itself by negotiating with Hanoi, though I had no precise ideas 
about the content of such a negotiation. 

In the summer of 1967, 1 attended one of the so-called Pugwash Confer- 
ences of scientists concerned with nuclear disarmament. Two participants 
who had heard of my visits to Indochina approached me with what 
seemed like an intriguing proposition. Raymond Aubrac, an official of the 
World Health Organization, had become acquainted with Ho Chi Minh in 
1946, when the Vietnamese communist leader had stayed at his home 
in Paris during negotiations with France. Aubrac offered to visit Hanoi, 
accompanied by a fellow scientist from the peace movement, Herbert 
Marcovich, to appeal personally to Ho Chi Minh on the subject of negotia- 
tions. I informed Bundy, who had become Assistant Secretary of State, 
and Defense Secretary McNamara. They encouraged the visit, provided 
that the two scientists traveled in a private capacity and did not purport 
to represent official American views. 

Aubrac and Marcovich journeyed to Hanoi, where they were received 


663 



Diplomacy 


by Ho Chi Minh. After delivering a ritualized condemnation of American 
“aggression,” Ho Chi Minh hinted that Hanoi would be willing to negoti- 
ate provided America stopped bombing North Vietnam. Mai Van Bo, Ha- 
noi’s diplomatic representative in Paris, was designated as the official 
contact. 

Several exchanges followed by means of a complicated and decidedly 
undiplomatic procedure. Since Hanoi would not communicate directly 
with Washington prior to a bombing halt, I, a private citizen, served as 
intermediary. Even so, Hanoi, hoarding its every last negotiating chip, 
would not authorize its representative to deal with even an unofficial 
American. Thus, messages were passed to me from Washington, usually 
by Secretary McNamara, and then from me on to the two Frenchmen, 
who would deliver them to Mai Van Bo with whatever explanations I had 
been authorized to provide. McNamara was eager to end the war, and 
repeatedly implored me to extract from my invisible interlocutors any 
hint, however oblique, that would enable him to promote the cause of a 
negotiated outcome. 

I attended part of the meeting between President Johnson and his 
advisers at which the final American offer was prepared. It was a melan- 
choly experience. Clearly, Johnson’s every instinct rebelled against a halt 
in bombing. Unsure as he was of his mastery of foreign policy, Johnson 
had had enough experience in politics to doubt the benefit of opening a 
negotiation with a unilateral concession. Yet he was desperate to end the 
war, battered as he was by domestic critics, and unwilling to overrule 
advisers who were eager to attempt diplomacy. In the end, Johnson 
yielded. The upshot was the so-called San Antonio Formula, devised after 
I had left the room, which Johnson presented in a speech in that city on 
September 29, 1967-. 

The United States is willing to stop all aerial and naval bombardment 
of North Vietnam when this will lead promptly to productive discus- 
sions. We, of course, assume that while discussions proceed, North 
Vietnam would not take advantage of the bombing cessation or limita- 
tion . 28 

The San Antonio Formula was one of the decisive turning points of the 
war. America offered to stop military action against North Vietnam — a 
precise obligation — in return for “productive” talks, as long as Hanoi did 
not take advantage of the bombing halt. No criteria were put forward for 
defining either “productive” or “advantage.” Yet, having demonstrated its 
capacity to manipulate the American domestic debate, Hanoi could have 
had few doubts that any American attempt to abrogate a bombing halt 


664 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


would be both controversial and time-consuming. Taking “no advantage” 
of the halt certainly did not seem to oblige Hanoi to stop guerrilla warfare 
or, for that matter, to abandon anything it was already doing; at most, the 
provision meant that Hanoi was not to escalate a winning strategy. 

It was characteristic of Hanoi’s negotiating tactics that even so one- 
sided an offer should have been refused. Indeed, Hanoi used the offer as 
a safety net to protect the all-out military effort it was about to unleash. 
Within days, my channel to Hanoi was broken off. The North Vietnamese, 
having grasped that the price of America’s stopping the bombing was as 
modest as it was abstruse, sought to increase the pressures on Johnson 
before sitting down to talk and taking up the proposal. The Tet Offensive 
was only a few months away. 

Hanoi had correctly sensed that the Americans’ growing discontent 
would no more tolerate stalemate in Vietnam than it had in Korea. Yet 
there was a qualitative difference in the nature of the ensuing domestic 
controversies. The wisdom of America’s involvement in Korea had never 
been challenged; the disagreement had concerned the measures re- 
quired to make it succeed. With respect to Vietnam, the original wide- 
spread consensus behind United States policy suddenly evaporated. In 
Korea, Administration critics had wanted the United States to do more; 
their alternative to Truman’s policy had been MacArthur’s strategy of 
escalation. In Vietnam, the overwhelming majority of critics urged reduc- 
ing the American effort — and, in time, abandoning it altogether; their 
views ranged from modification of America’s strategy to unconditional 
withdrawal. In Korea, America’s adversaries would have faced a much 
worse alternative had the opposition prevailed. In Vietnam, once the 
extent of the domestic rifts had become obvious, Hanoi quickly learned 
that a stalemated diplomacy combined with military pressures would 
work in its favor. Deadlocks would be blamed on lack of diplomatic 
initiatives by the Johnson Administration, and continuing American casu- 
alties would lead to calls for de-escalation, if not abandonment, of the 
war. 

Criticism of America’s Vietnam policy started out fairly conventionally, 
with reasonable questions being raised about whether the war could be 
won and about the relationship of means to ends. On March 11, 1968, 
Walter Lippmann applied his already well-established critique of contain- 
ment to Vietnam. America, he argued, had overextended itself, and the 
policy of containment was destroying any rational balance between na- 
tional goals and the resources by which they might be achieved: 

The fact is that his [LBI’s] war aims are unlimited: they promise the 

pacification of all of Asia. For such unlimited ends it is not possible to 


665 



Diplomacy 


win a war with limited means. Because our aims are limitless, we are 

sure to be “defeated.” 29 

To symbolize the irrelevance of traditional categories of thought when 
applied to Vietnam, Lippmann placed the word “defeated” in quotation 
marks, signifying that Vietnam was irrelevant to American security. With- 
drawal would, in that view, strengthen Americas overall position. 

The same point had already been made in 1966, when Senator Ful- 
bright had criticized the United States for succumbing to the “arrogance 
of power” by confusing its “power with virtue and major responsibilities 
with a universal mission.” 30 Less than two years earlier, Fulbright had 
chided de Gaulle for “confusing] the situation” by proposing that Viet- 
nam be neutralized. At that time, Fulbright had warned that such a course 
might “set off an unforeseeable chain of events [for] she [France] is nei- 
ther a major military force nor a major economic force in the Far East, 
and is therefore unlikely to be able to control or greatly influence the 
events which her initiative may precipitate.” In 1964, Fulbright had only 
discerned two “realistic” options: “the expansion of the conflict in one 
way or another, or a renewed effort to bolster the capacity of the South 
Vietnamese to prosecute the war successfully on its present scale.” 31 

What had happened in barely two years to persuade the Senator to 
downgrade Vietnam’s status from vital to peripheral? And why did it 
reflect arrogance that the Johnson Administration had, in the meantime, 
carried out both of Fulbright’s recommendations? Americas leaders, true 
to their national traditions, had not been content with resting the case for 
American assistance to Vietnam on security grounds which might, sooner 
or later, permit a debate over the costs and benefits. Casting the issue in 
terms of bringing democracy to Southeast Asia, they abandoned any logi- 
cal stopping point on the way in and — as it happened — on the way out 
as well. 

The critics of the war traveled along the same road as the leaders who 
were conducting it, only in the opposite direction. They began by basing 
conclusions on eminently practical grounds: the war was unwinnable, the 
costs exceeded the benefits, and America was overextending itself. But 
the critics, who were the products of the same American idealism, rapidly 
extended their critique to the moral plane in two stages: first, on the 
ground that, morally, there was really little difference between Hanoi and 
Saigon, which neatly dispensed with the ideological reason for the war; 
second, that America’s persistence in the war reflected not flawed practi- 
cal judgment but a moral rot at the core of the American system. As a 
result, a policy which had enjoyed nearly universal support turned, in the 


666 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


course of two years, into an indictment of the morality of America’s entire 
foreign policy and, a short while later, into a critique of American society 
itself. 

In the post-World War II period, America had been fortunate to have 
never had to choose between its moral convictions and its strategic analy- 
sis. All of its key decisions had been readily justified as both promoting 
democracy and resisting aggression. South Vietnam, however, could by 
no stretch of the imagination be described as democratic. All of Diem’s 
successor regimes felt beleaguered; South Vietnamese generals, who up 
to this time had been unknown to the public, were less than anxious to 
test their popularity at the polls. A convincing argument might have been 
made for the proposition that Saigon’s new rulers were far less repressive 
than Hanoi’s. That argument was, in fact, often made but never taken 
seriously. Moral relativism was unacceptable to a nation brought up on 
faith in the absolute distinction between good and evil. 

Critics increasingly argued that, if Saigon failed to meet full democratic 
standards — which they knew in their hearts to be impossible — it de- 
served to be jettisoned altogether. As time went on, the Domino Theory, 
the central security premise on which the defense of Vietnam had been 
based for nearly two decades, was first abandoned and then ridiculed. In 
one of the most comprehensive articles, Yale Professor Richard Renfield 
combined Lippmann’s criticism of strategic overextension with the charge 
that the two sides in the Vietnam conflict were morally equivalent; hence 
the war was senseless. In Vietnam, he argued, America was not so much 
resisting aggression as it was supporting the forces of conservatism 
against social change. 32 

Critics pointed to Saigon’s many inadequacies to demonstrate the 
moral unacceptability of the American effort. In 1968, James Reston asked 
the question which had been tormenting so many Americans: “What is 
the end that justifies this slaughter? How will we save Vietnam if we 
destroy it in the battle?” 33 By 1972, Fulbright declared that Johnson had 
never understood that “the issue was not between a ‘free people’ and a 
‘totalitarian regime’ but between rival totalitarian regimes; the fact that 
the war was not one of international aggression, ‘direct’ or otherwise, but 
an anticolonial war and then a civil war.” 34 

Television was then just coming into its own. The regular evening 
newscasts were attracting audiences in the tens of millions, far more 
people than even the most popular print journalists could hope to reach 
in a lifetime. And they possessed the advantage of visual images to provide 
a running editorial commentary. The newscasts reflected a craving for 
drama and showmanship that, even with the best of intentions, could not 


667 



Diplomacy 


always be balanced, if only because it was technically impossible to cover 
the atrocities the Vietcong were committing in the areas under their 
control The news anchor turned into a political figure, in the sense that 
only a president could have reached as many people — and certainly not 
with such regularity. 

Throughout the postwar era, Americans had responded to their lead- 
ers’ appeals for sacrifice in order to assist distant societies. In the crucible 
of Vietnam, America’s exceptionalism — the belief in the universal applica- 
bility of American values — which had conferred such momentum on 
postwar reconstruction, began turning on itself and adopting a kind of 
moral scorched-earth policy. As casualties mounted, the critique of Ameri- 
can foreign policy shifted from challenging the effectiveness of the policy 
to questioning the necessity for it — from an assault on the worthiness of 
America’s Vietnamese ally to challenging the worthiness of America, not 
just in Vietnam but globally as well. 

What lent a special poignancy to the attacks on America’s fitness to 
conduct a global policy was that they originated to a large extent in the 
universities and the intellectual community, which up to this time had 
contained the dedicated defenders of America’s international idealism . 35 
Involved in decision-making by Kennedy, many intellectual leaders were 
shattered when his assassination abruptly ended the New Frontier and 
further shaken by their students’ antiwar protests. The modalities of extri- 
cation from Vietnam no longer held any interest for them; under pressure 
from their own students, many professors edged ever closer toward uni- 
lateral, unconditional withdrawal. 

Challenging the assumptions of twenty years of bipartisan foreign pol- 
icy, the radical wing of the Vietnam protest ridiculed anticommunism as 
being archaic: “[W]e refuse to be anti-Communist,” said two pilgrims to 
Hanoi, Staughton Lynd and Tom Hayden. “We insist that the term has lost 
all specific content it once had. Instead it serves as the key category of 
abstract thought which Americans use to justify a foreign policy that is 
often no more sophisticated than rape .” 36 Even Hans Morgen thau, the 
doyen of American philosophers of the national interest, was moved to a 
proclamation of America’s immorality: “When we talk about the violation 
of the rules of war, we must keep in mind that the fundamental violation, 
from which all other specific violations follow, is the very waging of this 
kind of war .” 37 

To the leaders of the generation that had been brought up on the 
essentially uncontested verities of the Cold War, these outbursts were 
truly shocking. Lyndon Johnson, himself a principal formulator of the 
postwar consensus, was at a loss as to how to deal with an assault waged 


668 



VIETNAM: On THE ROAD TO DESPAIR 


by men and women from leading universities whose approbation he 
craved in direct proportion to his inability to find a common language 
with them. David Halberstam, who was by 1966 an acerbic critic of the 
war, had himself argued earlier “that Vietnam is a legitimate part of that 
(U.S.) global commitment ... it is perhaps one of only five or six nations 
in the world that is truly vital to U.S. interests. If it is this important, it may 
be worth a larger commitment on our part.” 38 

Johnson reacted by appealing to the orthodoxies of his predecessors, 
from Truman through Kennedy. But these had already begun to sound 
outdated, even irrelevant, to the critics. His offers for unconditional nego- 
tiations were rejected by Hanoi’s leaders, who were far too subtle at their 
craft to provide a safety valve for Americas domestic upheaval. To stem 
the tide, Johnson gradually modified his negotiating position, moving 
from demanding North Vietnamese withdrawal before America would 
stop hostilities to the San Antonio Formula for suspending bombing prior 
to negotiations; and from refusing to talk to Hanoi’s front in the South, 
the National Liberation Front (or the NLF) to agreeing to talk to individual 
representatives of it, and, finally, to conceding NLF participation as a 
political entity in negotiations. He also tried to tempt Hanoi with an 
economic-aid program for all of Indochina. Each of these moves was 
dismissed by Hanoi as inadequate, and by the majority of U.S. domestic 
critics as insincere. The national debate became polarized between vic- 
tory, for which there was no strategy, and withdrawal, for which there 
was no policy. 

The Administration’s more moderate critics — the group to which I 
belonged — urged a negotiated compromise. The real obstacle to that, 
however, was not Washington but Hanoi. The North Vietnamese commu- 
nists had not spent a lifetime in mortal struggle to end it by sharing 
power or by de-escalating the guerrilla war, their most effective means of 
pressure. The Vietnamese communists were no more capable than Stalin 
had been a generation earlier of coming to grips with the equally unreal- 
istic hope for a negotiation separate from some underlying balance of 
forces, or one simply left to the negotiating process itself. Johnson’s fre- 
quent assurances that he would be flexible and open-minded seemed to 
Hanoi both naive and irrelevant. 

Ironically, America would have to pay the same price for compromise 
as it would for victory. Hanoi would accept compromise only if it felt too 
weak to win — that is, after it had been defeated. America would only be 
able to show moderation after the war, not during it. All the standard 
“solutions” — of both the Administration and the moderate critics — were 
rendered irrelevant by Hanoi’s implacable determination. A cease-fire, 


669 



Diplomacy 


which to Americans seemed a desirable way of ending the killing, would, 
in Hanoi’s view, remove America’s incentive to withdraw. A coalition 
government that was more than a fig leaf on the road to a communist 
takeover seemed to Hanoi’s leaders to guarantee Saigon’s survival. 

The real choice before America was not between victory and compro- 
mise, but between victory and defeat. The difference between the North 
Vietnamese and the Americans was that Hanoi grasped that reality while 
neither Johnson nor his moderate critics would bring themselves to admit 
it. The practitioners of Realpolitik in Hanoi were convinced that the fate 
of Vietnam would be settled by the balance of forces on the ground — not 
at the conference table. 

In retrospect, there can be little question that America did not need to 
pay any price for the opening of negotiations. Hanoi had decided to 
negotiate before the 1968 American presidential election, if only to com- 
mit both political parties to a negotiated outcome. But Hanoi’s leaders 
would not enter negotiations without first making a major effort to tilt the 
military balance in their own direction. The instrument for improving 
their negotiating position became the Tet Offensive, which occurred dur- 
ing the lunar new year, or Tet. In each year, including 1968, a truce had 
been agreed on for that period. Nevertheless, on January 30, communist 
forces launched a large offensive against thirty South Vietnamese provin- 
cial capitals. Achieving total surprise, they seized key targets in Saigon, 
reaching even the grounds of the United States embassy and General 
Westmoreland’s headquarters. The ancient capital of Hue fell to the com- 
munists and was held by them for twenty-five days. 

Militarily, Tet is now recognized as a major communist defeat. 39 It was 
the first time that the guerrillas surfaced and engaged in open combat. 
The decision to launch a nationwide assault forced them to fight on 
battlefields they normally would not have chosen. Superior American 
firepower wiped out almost the entire guerrilla infrastructure, just as U.S. 
Army textbooks had predicted. Throughout the remainder of the war, the 
Vietcong guerrillas ceased being an effective force; almost all of the fight- 
ing was done by the North Vietnamese army’s regular units. 

In some respects, Tet vindicated America’s military doctrine. By staking 
everything on one throw of the dice, the communists accepted the battle 
of attrition American strategy had longed for. Perhaps they had suffered 
greater casualties than official reports suggested; or perhaps they counted 
on America’s eagerness to negotiate to provide them with a safety net. 

Nevertheless, the Tet Offensive turned into a major psychological vic- 
tory for Hanoi. One can reflect with some melancholy on the course of 
events had American leaders stepped up pressure on the North Vietnam- 


670 



Vietnam. On the Road to Despair 


ese main-force units, which were now deprived of their guerrilla shield. 
Had America really gone for broke, it is probable that Johnson would 
have achieved the unconditional negotiations he was proposing, and 
maybe even an unconditional cease-fire. This is suggested by the rapidity 
— less than seventy-two hours — with which Hanoi accepted Johnson’s 
renewed offer to negotiate, which was coupled with a partial bombing 
halt based on the San Antonio Formula. 

American leaders, however, had had enough and not because public 
opinion had deserted them. Polls showed that 61 percent of the American 
people considered themselves hawks, 23 percent doves, while 70 percent 
favored continuation of the bombing. 40 The group that lost its nerve 
represented the very Establishment figures who had backed intervention 
all along. Johnson assembled a group of leaders from previous adminis- 
trations, most of them hawks, including such stalwarts as Dean Acheson, 
John McCloy, McGeorge Bundy, and Douglas Dillon, among others. By a 
large majority, they advised that escalation be ended and the liquidation 
of the war begun. Given Hanoi’s attitudes, which were not yet generally 
understood, this decision had to be the beginning of defeat. In fairness, I 
generally concurred with these “Wise Men,” which proves that turning 
points are easier to recognize in retrospect than when they are taking 
place. 

On February 27, 1968, television anchorman Walter Cronkite, then at 
the height of his influence, sent shock waves through the White House by 
predicting failure: 

It seems now more certain than ever that the bloody experience of 
Vietnam is to end in a stalemate. This summer’s almost certain standoff 
will either end in real give-and-take negotiations or terrible escalation; 
and for every means we have to escalate, the enemy can match us — 41 

The last proposition was open to considerable question; it simply could 
not have been true that North Vietnam was the only country in history to 
prove impervious to every conceivable calculation of risk and benefit. 
True, it had a higher threshold for suffering than almost any other coun- 
try, but there was a threshold nonetheless. And the last thing Hanoi 
was interested in was the give-and-take of negotiations. Still, Cronkite’s 
hyperbole contained a major element of truth: Hanoi’s breaking point 
clearly exceeded America’s. 

The Wall Street Journal , which up to this point had been an Administra- 
tion supporter, also jumped ship, asking rhetorically whether develop- 
ments were “making hash of our original, commendable objectives? ... If 


671 



Diplomacy 


practically nothing is to be left of government or nation, what is there to 
be saved for what?” The Journal thought that “the American people 
should be getting ready to accept, if they haven’t already, the prospect 
that the whole Vietnam effort may be doomed.” 42 On March 10, NBC 
concluded a special program on Vietnam with what was fast turning into 
a common refrain: “Laying aside all other arguments, the time is at hand 
when we must decide whether it is futile to destroy Vietnam in order to 
save it.” 43 Time magazine joined the chorus on March 15: “1968 has 
brought home the awareness that victory in Viet Nam — or even a favor- 
able settlement — may simply be beyond the grasp of the world’s greatest 
power.” 44 

Leading senators entered the fray. Mansfield declared: “We are in the 
wrong place and we are fighting the wrong kind of war.” 45 Fulbright 
raised the question of “the authority of the administration to expand 
the war without the consent of Congress and without any debate or 
consideration by Congress.” 46 

Under the impact of such attacks, Johnson buckled. On March 31, 1968, 
he announced a unilateral partial bombing halt for the area north of the 
20th Parallel, to be followed by a total bombing halt as soon as substantive 
negotiations began. He indicated that no further significant reinforce- 
ments would be sent to Vietnam, and again repeated the oft-invoked 
reassurance that “our objective in South Vietnam has never been the 
annihilation of the enemy.” 47 Six weeks after Hanoi had violated a formal 
cease-fire by launching a devastating assault on American installations and 
killed thousands of civilians in Hue alone, Johnson invited Hanoi’s leaders 
to participate in the economic development of Southeast Asia, a transpar- 
ent hint at the prospect of economic aid. He also announced that he 
would not stand for re-election. The President who had sent 500,000 
troops to Southeast Asia would leave their extrication to his successor. 

It was one of the most fateful presidential decisions of the postwar 
period. Had Johnson not made this dramatic renunciation, he could have 
contested the election on the issue of Vietnam and secured a popular 
mandate one way or another. If his health did not permit him to risk a 
second term, Johnson should have kept up the pressure on Hanoi for the 
remainder of his term in order to leave his successor with the best 
possible options for whichever choice he and the Congress might agree 
on after the election. Given Hanoi’s weakness in the wake of Tet, a policy 
of pressure in 1968 would almost certainly have produced a much better 
negotiating framework than the one that finally emerged. 

By simultaneously de-escalating, renouncing his candidacy, and offer- 
ing negotiations, Johnson combined every disadvantage. His potential 


672 



Vietnam: On the Road to Despair 


successors vied with each other in making promises of peace, but without 
defining the term. Thus were created the conditions for public disillu- 
sionment once negotiations actually started. Hanoi had gained a bombing 
halt in exchange for essentially procedural talks, and was given the oppor- 
tunity to restore its infrastructure in the South, albeit with North Vietnam- 
ese personnel. It had no incentive to settle with Johnson, and every 
temptation to repeat the same test of strength with his successor. 


673 





? ' : ' 


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN 

Vietnam: The Extrication; 
Nixon 


It fell to the Nixon Administration to extricate the United States from its 
first experience with an unsuccessful war, and from the first foreign 
commitment in which Americas moral convictions clashed with what 
was possible. Few foreign policy tasks have proved more wrenching; no 
country has managed such a transition without anguish. 

Though Frances withdrawal from Algeria was frequently cited as the 
model for America to follow, it in fact took de Gaulle somewhat longer 
than the four years required by the Nixon Administration to end Amer- 
ica’s involvement in Indochina. In extricating France from Algeria, de 
Gaulle had had to shoulder the burden of abandoning a million French 
settlers, some of whose families had been there for generations. In with- 
drawing American troops from Vietnam, Nixon had to liquidate a commit- 
ment which four American presidents over the course of two decades 
had proclaimed as being vital to the security of all free peoples. 

Nixon took on this heartbreaking assignment under the most fractious 


674 



VIETNAM: THE EXTRICATION 


domestic circumstances since the Civil War. Even at a remove of twenty- 
five years, the abruptness of the collapse of America’s national consensus 
on Vietnam comes as a shock. In 1965, America was dedicating itself — 
amidst general approval — to winning a guerrilla war against what was 
seen as a global communist conspiracy, and to building free institutions 
in Southeast Asia; two years later, in 1967, the same enterprise began to 
be perceived not only as having failed, but as the aberrant policy of 
war-crazed politicians. At one moment, the intellectual community was 
celebrating the advent of a progressive young president; at almost the 
next, it was accusing his successor of atrocities, systematic lying, and a 
lust for war, despite the fact that the new president’s strategy — or at 
least his strategists — were essentially the same as those of his mourned 
predecessor. By the end of his presidency in 1968, Johnson could no 
longer appear in public except on military bases or at other locations 
from which violent protesters could be physically barred. Although he 
was an incumbent president, he did not even find it possible to appear at 
the 1968 national convention of his own party. 

After a pause of only a few months, the violent opposition to the war 
resumed and even accelerated under Johnson’s successor, Richard Nixon. 
What made the domestic debate so bitter and so nearly impossible to 
resolve was that the publicized disagreements were surrogates for a 
deeper underlying philosophical controversy. Nixon was eager to negoti- 
ate an honorable extrication, which he defined as almost anything except 
turning over to the North Vietnamese communists the millions of people 
who had been led by his predecessors to rely on America. He took 
credibility and honor seriously because they defined America’s capacity 
to shape a peaceful international order. 

On the other hand, the leaders of the Peace Movement considered the 
war so repugnant that an honorable extrication from Vietnam had come 
to sound like an absurdity. What the Nixon Administration perceived as 
potential national humiliation, the Vietnam protesters treated as a desir- 
able national catharsis. The Administration sought an outcome that would 
enable America to continue its postwar international role as the protector 
and sustainer of free peoples — precisely the role that many in the Peace 
Movement wanted to end, viewing it as the arrogance and the presump- 
tion of a flawed society. 

In the space of a single generation, America had traversed the Second 
World War, the Korean War, and a decade and a half of Cold War crises. 
Vietnam proved one exertion too many, the sacrifice that was too un- 
bearable because it was so at odds with traditional American values and 
expectations. In the 1920s and 1930s, when the generation of Nixon and 


675 



Diplomacy 


Johnson had been in its adolescence, Americans had viewed themselves 
as being above the Machiavellian dealings of the Europeans. During the 
1940s and 1950s, when that generation came of age, America believed it 
had been called on to undertake a righteous, global mission. Indeed, it 
emerged as the unchallenged leader of the free world. By the time these 
men were reaching the apex of their political careers in the 1960s, the 
Vietnam Peace Movement was questioning that global mission. By the 
1970s, a new generation of Americans had arrived on the scene and 
viewed America as no longer pristine. To deserve to be involved world- 
wide, America required, in their view, a period of concentration on its 
own improvement. 

Thus the generations were turning at the precise moment when 
America faced the most ambiguous moral challenge of the entire postwar 
period. The critics were repelled by graphic depictions on television of 
the war’s brutality, and were increasingly uncertain about the moral stat- 
ure of America’s ally. Convinced that there simply had to exist some 
solution that permitted an instant end to the killing, their mood turned 
increasingly sour. American exceptionalism had sustained one of the 
great eras of American policy with its idealism, its innocence, and its 
dedication; now it turned relentless in demanding the same perfec- 
tionism of America’s allies, and the absence of ambiguity in America’s 
choices. Failing these, it envisaged only shame for America and doom for 
its ally. 

America’s moral righteousness inhibited a flexible diplomacy. Vietnam 
presented at best imperfect alternatives and heartbreaking choices. The 
intuitive impulse of the Peace Movement was to recoil from that world, 
seeking surcease in America’s original vision of itself as the unsullied 
pillar of virtue. Perhaps a charismatic leader like Franklin Roosevelt, John 
Kennedy, or Ronald Reagan might have found a way to deal with this 
nostalgia. It proved beyond Richard Nixon’s otherwise extraordinary tal- 
ents. Unlike Johnson, Nixon was highly sophisticated in international af- 
fairs. He entered the presidency convinced, like many antiwar critics, that 
a clear-cut victory in Vietnam was no longer possible, if it ever had been. 
From the outset, Nixon understood that destiny had dealt him the thank- 
less hand of having to arrange a retreat and some sort of exit from a 
demoralizing conflict. That he should have desired to implement this task 
with honor was natural for a president — it went with the job description. 
What he could not handle, either emotionally or intellectually, was the 
fact that the graduates of the best schools and the members of the Estab- 
lishment whom he admired as much as he envied were urging a course 
of action which, in his view, amounted to a humiliating collapse for 
America and the betrayal of an ally. 


676 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


Nixon chose to interpret the often violent protests on the part of those 
he considered privileged as the culmination of a personal attack upon 
him by the ideological enemies of a lifetime. In his eyes, this transformed 
the issue of Vietnam into a political battle. As sensitive and subtle as Nixon 
was in the conduct of diplomacy, he was also a street fighter when it came 
to domestic politics, relying on methods he never ceased to believe had 
been the stock-in-trade of many of his predecessors. 

It will never be known whether an act of grace by the President might 
have assuaged the rage which had begun to swell long before Nixon took 
office. By the late 1960s, the violent protest of the students had grown 
into a global phenomenon, taking place as well in France, the Nether- 
lands, and Germany — none of which was involved in a situation compara- 
ble to Vietnam or had racial problems in the American sense. Nixon was 
in any event too insecure and too vulnerable to start building bridges at 
that stage of his life. 

In fairness, it must be noted that Nixon received little help from the 
Establishment, which, when all was said and done, had left him with the 
problem he was facing. Senior officials of the previous administrations 
that had involved America in the Vietnam War shared many of the convic- 
tions of the Nixon Administration. Men like Averell Harriman and former 
Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford had been among the principal 
practitioners of the postwar bipartisan consensus on foreign policy; 
normally they would have felt obliged to preserve some degree of na- 
tional cohesion in a time of crisis, and would have closed ranks with a 
beleaguered administration on some agreed-upon minimum peace pro- 
gram. 

This time, however, the shapers of the postwar foreign policy consen- 
sus could not bring themselves to support their President. In effect, they 
had been the first targets of the peace demonstrations — a fate they found 
particularly searing because in the vanguard of the Peace Movement were 
men and women whom they admired and had long considered as their 
core constituency. They had been the foot soldiers of the New Frontier 
and, metaphorically if not in fact, viewed the protesters as their progeny. 
Without approving of the Peace Movement’s methods, key members of 
the Johnson Administration slid into de facto alliance with the more 
radical of the protesters. Their unending barrage of seemingly moderate 
objections to Administration policies kept their position one concession 
away from agreement with Nixon and compounded the President’s re- 
sentment that they were thus keeping a national consensus just out of 
reach. 

Nixon decided to soldier on in order to bring about an honorable 
peace. Because I was his principal associate in this effort, my account of 


677 



Diplomacy 


it is inevitably affected by the role I played and by my concurrence with 
its basic premises. 

In the interval between election and inauguration, Nixon had asked me 
to inform the North Vietnamese of his commitment to a negotiated out- 
come. Their reply was our introduction to what became Hanoi’s standard 
demand: America’s unconditional withdrawal coupled with the overthrow 
of Nguyen Van Thieu’s government in Saigon. 

Hanoi did not even bother to test the sincerity of Nixon’s professions. 
Within three weeks of Nixon’s inauguration, it launched a new offensive 
— the so-called Mini-Tet Offensive — during which an average of 1,000 
Americans were killed each month over the next four months. Clearly, 
Nixon’s offer to compromise had failed to stir any sense of reciprocity in 
those implacable leaders. Nor was Hanoi restrained in the slightest by its 
1968 “understanding” with the Johnson Administration that it would not 
take advantage of the bombing halt. 

The Nixon Administration had entered office hoping to develop a na- 
tional consensus through reasonable compromise proposals, and thereby 
to confront Hanoi as a substantially unified nation. It soon became clear 
that, like his predecessors, Nixon had underestimated the tenacity and 
the determination of Hanoi. Ho Chi Minh had become increasingly 
certain that, given the inept Saigon leadership and faltering American 
commitment, Hanoi’s forces could win an unconditional victory. A 
practitioner of Realpolitik, Ho was not about to concede at a negotiating 
table what he expected blood and bullets would win him on the battle- 
field. 

There could have been no less promising addressees for a compromise 
peace than the dour heroes who constituted Hanoi’s leadership. When 
the Nixon Administration entered office, the Democratic Party, which had 
launched the Vietnam adventure, had split sharply between an official 
platform and a “dove” minority position (backed by such leaders as Sena- 
tors Ted Kennedy, George McGovern, and Eugene McCarthy) that had 
been rejected by the Democratic National Convention. Within nine 
months of entering office, the Republican Nixon Administration had ex- 
ceeded the dove platform of the Democratic Party. Hanoi pocketed every 
American concession without a hint of reciprocity and unswervingly ad- 
hered to its demands for a fixed and unconditional deadline for American 
withdrawals and the replacement of the Saigon government by what was 
effectively a communist regime. Hanoi insisted that, unless both of these 
demands were met simultaneously, American prisoners would not be 
released. What Hanoi was demanding amounted to capitulation com- 
pounded by dishonor. 


678 



Vietnam. The Extrication 


Presidents, however, cannot abandon a task because it proves more 
difficult than they had' expected. Even before his inauguration, Nixon had 
ordered a systematic review of how to bring the war to a conclusion. 
Three options were analyzed: unilateral withdrawal; a showdown with 
Hanoi through a combination of military and political pressures; and a 
gradual shifting of the responsibility for the war to the Saigon government 
in order to permit the United States to withdraw gradually. 

The first option, that of unilateral withdrawal, would later become the 
subject of much revisionist speculation. It has been argued that, upon 
coming into office, Nixon should have announced a date for withdrawal 
and ended the war by a unilateral American decision. 1 

Would that history were as simple as journalism. Though presidents 
have a large area of discretion, it is bounded by the political environment 
and constrained by practical reality. When Nixon came into office in 1969, 
neither political party had ever advocated unilateral withdrawal and no 
public-opinion poll showed any support for it. The “dove” platform re- 
jected at the 1968 Democratic National Convention had called for a reduc- 
tion of United States offensive operations, a mutual withdrawal of outside 
forces (including those of North Vietnam), and encouragement of a policy 
of reconciliation between the Saigon government and the National Libera- 
tion Front. Reciprocity was its rationale and no mention had been made 
of a unilateral pullout. 

The Johnson Administration’s peace program had been expressed in 
the Manila Formula, which proposed that American forces would begin 
withdrawing only six months after a North Vietnamese withdrawal, and 
only after the level of violence had been reduced. Even then, a substantial 
American residual force was slated to remain in Vietnam, on the model 
of Korea. The official Democratic platform had called for a free political 
contest in South Vietnam, but only after military operations had ended. 
Finally, the Republican platform had called for “de-Americanization” of 
the war, a change in military strategy, and negotiations based on neither 
“peace at any price” nor camouflaged surrender. When Nixon came into 
office, therefore, every wing of both major political parties had urged 
outcomes which, without exception, insisted on conditions that Hanoi 
would have to fulfill before the United States would withdraw. All had 
implied compromise, not surrender. 

An immediate, unconditional, and unilateral American withdrawal 
would have posed insuperable practical problems as well. More than half 
a million Americans were fighting at the side of a South Vietnamese army 
of some 700,000 troops and were facing at least 250,000 regular North 
Vietnamese army troops and an equal number of guerrillas. In the early 


679 



Diplomacy 


days of the Nixon Administration, an immediate commitment to unilateral 
withdrawal would have left a vast American expeditionary force trapped 
between the wrath of the South Vietnamese, America’s betrayed allies, 
and the implacable assault of the North Vietnamese. 

The Defense Department estimated that an orderly withdrawal could 
not be organized in less than fifteen months, during which time the 
position of American forces gradually would have weakened to a point 
where the residual forces could have turned into hostages of both Viet- 
namese parties. Even if one assumes that the South Vietnamese army 
simply would have collapsed rather than have turned on its American 
allies, the result would have been withdrawal amidst unspeakable chaos, 
especially since Hanoi would surely have sought to use its increasingly 
dominant position to impose even more stringent peace terms. Unilateral 
withdrawal had all the makings of an awesome and bloody fiasco. 

Above all, the Nixon Administration was convinced that unilateral with- 
drawal would turn into a geopolitical disaster. Confidence in America’s 
reliability had been painfully built over twenty years. It was the key com- 
ponent in the structure of the free world. A 180-degree reversal of a 
major American commitment extending over four administrations by a 
president heretofore identified with a conservative foreign policy would 
have produced profound disillusionment among America’s allies, particu- 
larly among those most dependent on American support, regardless of 
whether they agreed with the details of America’s Vietnam policy. 

In these circumstances, the Nixon Administration concluded that it 
needed a strategy to affect Hanoi’s calculation about the inevitability of its 
total victory and its ability to impose unilateral withdrawal. Therefore, the 
second option considered was to try to bring matters to a head rapidly 
through a combination of political and military measures. This was the 
strategy I personally preferred because I believed it would end the drain- 
ing domestic struggle and enable the Administration to turn to more 
unifying tasks. This option had three components: (1) a Congressional 
endorsement to pursue the war; (2) a major effort at negotiations in 
which America would make every concession possible short of colluding 
in a communist takeover; and (3) an altered military strategy which, 
within South Vietnam, would concentrate on defending heavily populated 
areas while at the same time seeking to destroy Hanoi’s supply routes by 
interdicting the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos, clearing out the base areas in 
Cambodia, and mining the harbors of North Vietnam. Over a period of 
four years, all of these measures were eventually adopted, and they did 
bring Hanoi to accept terms in 1972 that it had consistently rejected for a 
decade. Had they all been initiated simultaneously and while America still 


680 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


had a large ground combat force in Vietnam, the impact might have 
proved decisive. 

Early in his term, Nixon might have gone to the Congress, outlined his 
idea for an honorable outcome of the Vietnam War, and asked for an 
endorsement, emphasizing that, in its absence, he would have no choice 
except to withdraw unilaterally, however appalling the consequences. 
Nixon rejected advice to that effect on two grounds. First, he viewed it as 
an abdication of presidential responsibility. Second, having served for six 
years in the Congress, he was convinced — almost certainly correctly — 
that the Congress would evade making a clear-cut choice and give him — 
at best — some ambiguous endorsement hedged by so many conditions 
as to magnify the problem. 

At first, Nixon hesitated to attack the Vietnamese logistics system. Rela- 
tions with the Soviet Union and China, which were still precarious, might 
have deteriorated further, and the triangular relationship which contrib- 
uted so much to flexibility in later American foreign policy might have 
been delayed or thwarted. Frustrated public hopes for a relaxation of 
tensions in Vietnam might have inflamed the Peace Movement further. 
The military outcome seemed too uncertain and the domestic cost might 
prove unmanageable. The “forward strategy” would have encountered so 
much resistance among Nixon’s closest advisers that it could only have 
been implemented by a shake-up of the Cabinet and such an expenditure 
of presidential energy that it might have blighted prospects for other vital, 
long-range initiatives. 

The American people seemed to be asking their government to pursue 
two incompatible objectives simultaneously: they wanted the war to 
end and America not to capitulate. Nixon and his advisers shared this 
ambivalence. In seeking to navigate American policy through these con- 
tradictions, Nixon chose the third option — the so-called route of Vietnam- 
ization— not because he thought it was a brilliant deus ex machina but 
because, in his judgment, it kept in relatively safest balance the three key 
components of America’s extrication from Vietnam: sustaining America’s 
domestic morale, affording Saigon an honest chance to stand on its own, 
and giving Hanoi incentive to settle. Keeping these three dimensions of 
policy in some manageable relationship to each other became the ulti- 
mate test of America’s extrication from Vietnam. 

The American public was to be reassured by withdrawals of American 
forces and by serious negotiating efforts; South Vietnam would be pro- 
vided a genuine opportunity to defend itself through massive American 
aid and training; Hanoi would be faced with both the carrot of peace 
initiatives and the stick of periodic retaliation to exhaust it and to serve 


681 



Diplomacy 


as a warning that America’s restraint had its limits. A complex strategy, 
Vietnamization nevertheless involved the huge risk that it simply might 
not prove possible to keep the three elements of the strategy synchro- 
nized; time might run out, and the policy might end up falling between 
two stools. It was a precarious undertaking at best, for every withdrawal 
would encourage Hanoi and every parting shot would inflame the Peace 
Movement. 

In a memorandum I sent to Nixon dated September 10, 1969 — much 
of which was drafted by Anthony Lake, who was then my executive assis- 
tant and is currently President Clinton’s National Security Adviser — I ad- 
dressed the risks of Vietnamization. 2 If Vietnamization took too long, 
the memorandum argued, public restlessness might increase rather than 
diminish. The Administration would then find itself in a no-man’s-land 
between hawks and doves — too accommodating for the hawks, too belli- 
cose for the doves. Government statements designed to placate both 
groups would “serve to confuse Hanoi but also to confirm it in its course 
of waiting us out”: 

. . . “Vietnamization” will run into increasingly serious problems as we 
proceed down its path. 

— Withdrawal of U.S. troops will become like salted peanuts to the 
American public: the more U.S. troops come home, the more will be 
demanded. This could eventually result, in effect, in demands for unilat- 
eral withdrawal — perhaps within a year. 

— The more troops are withdrawn, the more Hanoi will be encour- 
aged 

— Each U.S. soldier that is withdrawn will be relatively more im- 
portant to the effort in the south, as he will represent a higher percent- 
age of U.S. forces than did his predecessor 

— It will become harder and harder to maintain the morale of those 
who remain, not to speak of their mothers. 

— “Vietnamization” may not lead to reduction in U.S. casualties until 
its final stages, as our casualty rate may be unrelated to the total number 
of American troops in South Vietnam. To kill about 150 U.S. soldiers a 
week, the enemy needs to attack only a small portion of our forces. . . . 3 

If all this was true, the memorandum argued, Hanoi would focus on 
inflicting a psychological, not a military, defeat on the United States; it 
would prolong the war, stall negotiations, and wait for the American 
domestic situation to unravel — a prediction which substantially came 
true. 

The memorandum foresaw many of our later difficulties; it was also 


682 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


doomed to irrelevance. For one thing, although it was submitted to the 
President, I did not follow it into the Oval Office. In Washington, ideas 
do not sell themselves. Authors of memoranda who are not willing to 
fight for them are more likely to find their words turn into ex post facto 
alibis than guides to action. Recoiling before the bitter opposition and 
domestic turmoil which the alternative of trying to force a showdown 
with Hanoi would have evoked, I never forced a systematic consideration 
of this option. Nor did the President investigate it, almost certainly for the 
same reason. Nixon had no incentive to overturn his decision in favor of 
the Vietnamization option so long as none of the government agencies 
concerned with Vietnam expressed any reservations. And none of them 
did, primarily because they were too shell-shocked by the demonstrations 
to want to get into the line of fire. 

I have reviewed the anguish of that choice in order to show that, by 
the time Nixon took office, the only choices in Vietnam were among 
comparable evils. The fact that Vietnamization would prove excruciatingly 
difficult did not make the other options any more attractive. This central 
reality eluded the American critics of the Vietnam War, as it has indeed 
eluded much of the American public in other instances: foreign policy 
often involves deciding among imperfect choices. The choice Nixon faced 
in Vietnam was between almost equally unpalatable alternatives. After 
twenty years of containment, America was paying the price for overexten- 
sion; there were no simple choices left. 

Although Vietnamization was a risky course, on balance it was the best 
of the available options. It had the advantage of giving the American and 
South Vietnamese peoples a way of getting used to the inevitable Ameri- 
can withdrawal. If, in the process of inexorably reducing the American 
forces, America succeeded in strengthening South Vietnam — and the 
Nixon Administration meant to do just that — America’s objective would 
be achieved. If it failed and unilateral withdrawal became the only re- 
maining choice, the final extrication could take place after American 
forces had shrunk to a level which reduced the risks of chaos and humilia- 
tion. 

As this policy unfolded, Nixon was determined to make a major effort 
to negotiate, and asked me to implement this assignment. French Presi- 
dent Georges Pompidou succinctly summed up what was ahead for me. 
Since his office arranged the logistics for my secret negotiations in Paris 
with the North Vietnamese, I briefed him after nearly every negotiating 
session. On one such occasion, when I was feeling especially dejected 
about the seemingly intractable stalemate, Pompidou remarked in his 
matter-of-fact, commonsense way: “You are condemned to succeed.” 


683 



Diplomacy 


Public officials are not at liberty to pick the time of their service to their 
country or the tasks that await them. Had I been given any choice in the 
matter, I would certainly have selected a more accommodating negotiat- 
ing partner than Le Due Tho. Experience had reinforced what ideology 
had taught him and his colleagues on the Hanoi Politburo — that guerrilla 
wars are about winners and losers, not about compromise. In its early 
stages, Vietnam ization did not impress them: “How can you expect to 
prevail with the South Vietnamese army alone when it could not win with 
the assistance of 500,000 Americans?” asked a supremely confident Le 
Due Tho in 1970. It was a haunting question which tormented us as well. 
Over four years, a combination of strengthening Saigon and weakening 
Hanoi made a favorable answer appear within reach. Even at that, it would 
still take a blockade, a failed North Vietnamese offensive, and intense 
bombing to bring Hanoi to conclude an agreement. 

The phenomenon of a totally implacable foe uninterested in compro- 
mise — indeed, seeking to turn deadlock into a weapon — was alien to the 
American experience. An ever-greater number of Americans yearned for 
compromise. But Hanoi’s leaders had launched their war in order to win, 
not to cut a deal. Thus, the categories of the American debate — the many 
proposals for bombing halts, cease-fires, deadlines for American with- 
drawal, and coalition government — were never relevant to Hanoi’s calcu- 
lations. Hanoi bargained only when it was under severe pressure — in 
particular, whenever America resumed bombing, and most of all after the 
mining of North Vietnamese harbors. Yet recourse to pressure was pre- 
cisely what most inflamed the critics at home. 

Negotiations with the North Vietnamese took place on two levels. There 
were formal meetings of the four parties to the conflict at the Hotel 
Majestic in Paris, comprising the United States, the Thieu government, 
the NLF (Hanoi’s South Vietnamese front organization), and the Hanoi 
government. Though months had been spent arguing about the shape of 
the table at which the NLF might be seated without implying its recogni- 
tion by Saigon, the formal negotiations immediately ran into the ground. 
The forum was too large, the publicity too unrelenting, and Hanoi proved 
too unwilling to grant equal status to Saigon or, for that matter, even to 
its own surrogate, the NLF. 

The Nixon Administration therefore continued the so-called private — 
that is, secret — talks, which were confined to the American and North 
Vietnamese delegations and had been started by Averell Harriman and 
Cyrus Vance, the negotiators during the last months of the Johnson Ad- 
ministration. Typically, Le Due Tho’s arrival in Paris would signal that 
Hanoi was ready for a round of talks. Although he held the fifth position 


684 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


in the Hanoi hierarchy, it was Le Due Tho’s conceit to call himself merely 
a special adviser to Xuan Thuy, a Foreign Ministry functionary who was 
technically the head of the North Vietnamese delegation at the Hotel 
Majestic. 

The American bargaining position was to separate the military and the 
political issues and it did not change after 1971. This program called for 
a cease-fire followed by a total withdrawal of American forces and an end 
to resupply and reinforcement from the North. The political future of 
South Vietnam would be left to a free political contest. Hanoi’s position 
until the breakthrough of October 1972 was to demand an unconditional 
deadline for total American withdrawal, and the dismantling of the Thieu 
government. The deadline was the admission price into negotiating on 
any other issue, and would hold regardless of success on the other topics. 
America was asking for compromise; Hanoi for capitulation. There was 
no middle road until a balance of forces on the ground made compro- 
mise possible — which lasted only as long as the balance of forces did. 

The meetings were invariably requested by the American side, using 
General Vernon Walters, the military attache at the United States embassy 
in Paris, as intermediary. (Walters later had a distinguished career as 
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, Permanent Representative to the 
United Nations, and Ambassador to Germany, in addition to undertaking 
numerous sensitive presidential missions.) Maneuvering the United States 
into making the first move was one of Hanoi’s relentless ploys to establish 
psychological dominance. The tactic showed how well Hanoi had grasped 
America’s domestic crisis. If Le Due Tho was in Paris for any length of 
time without being contacted by the United States government, he was 
certain to drop many hints to journalists or visiting members of the 
Congress about the Nixon Administration’s failure to explore Hanoi’s 
demonstrably peaceful intentions. Given the state of America’s domestic 
controversy, such hints were sure to receive wide currency, and he was 
capable of dropping them even when talks were taking place. 

During each of Le Due Tho’s visits to Paris between 1970 and 1972, five 
or six meetings would take place over a period of a few months. (There 
were also several meetings with Xuan Thuy alone. In the absence of Le 
Due Tho, they proved a total waste of time.) 

The negotiations followed a stereotyped procedure. As the formal head 
of the Vietnamese negotiating team, Xuan Thuy would begin with the 
same interminable recitation of the Vietnamese negotiating position that 
was familiar to us from the sessions at the Hotel Majestic. He would then 
“give the floor to Special Advisor Le Due Tho.” Immaculately dressed in 
a brown or black Mao suit, Le Due Tho would then deliver an equally 


685 



Diplomacy 


long speech focused on the philosophical issues as he saw them, inter- 
spersed with epic accounts of previous Vietnamese struggles for indepen- 
dence. 

Until nearly the very end of the negotiations, Le Due Tho’s theme 
remained the same: the balance of forces was in Hanoi’s favor and would 
be so increasingly; wars were fought for political objectives, hence the 
American proposal for a cease-fire and an exchange of prisoners was 
absurd and unacceptable; the political solution had to begin with the 
United States’ overthrow of the South Vietnamese government. (At one 
point, Le Due Tho even helpfully suggested a method for accomplishing 
this goal — the assassination of Thieu.) 

All of this was presented with impeccable politeness, a frigid demeanor 
conveying moral superiority, and in a Marxist vocabulary impervious to 
interjections by the benighted imperialists. Le Due Tho would give no 
quarter on even the most abstruse point that lent itself to ideological 
instruction. On one occasion, I sought a break in the talks, invoking what 
I considered a sufficiently tactful Marxist formulation — that “objective 
necessity” made an interruption necessary. This, however, merely caused 
Le Due Tho to deliver another ten-minute lecture about the inappropri- 
ateness of an imperialist like myself using Marxist terminology. 

The basic strategy behind Le Due Tho’s glacial way of proceeding was 
to convey that time was on his side because he was in a position to exploit 
America’s divisions to his own benefit. In the course of the first set of 
meetings, between February and April 1970, he rejected a cease-fire, a 
fifteen-month withdrawal schedule, 4 de-escalation of fighting, and the 
neutralization of Cambodia. (Interestingly enough, in his catalogue of 
grievances, which spared us no detail, Le Due Tho never mentioned the 
“secret” bombing of Cambodian sanctuaries.) 

During the second set of negotiations, from May to July 1971, Le Due 
Tho plumbed a new low of cynicism. At the public forum, the NLF had 
tabled a seven-point plan. Le Due Tho proposed a somewhat different 
and far more specific nine-point scheme in the secret talks, specifically 
insisting that the latter serve as a basis for the real negotiations. In the 
meantime, communist spokesmen clamored for an answer to their public 
seven-point plan, and the Nixon Administration fell under attack for not 
responding to a proposal which the Vietnamese negotiators had made 
clear they did not want to negotiate. This charade went on until Nixon 
unveiled the maneuver publicly, whereupon Hanoi published a two-point 
“elaboration” of the seven-point plan, which soon elicited further public 
pressure on Nixon. After the final negotiations were over, I asked Le Due 
Tho what exactly the two-point elaboration had elaborated. “Nothing,” he 
replied with a smile. 


686 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


During the third round of negotiations, which took place from August 
1972 to January 1973, the breakthrough occurred. On October 8, Le Due 
Tho abandoned his standard demand that America overthrow the Saigon 
government, and agreed to a cease-fire. From then on, matters moved 
rapidly to a conclusion. Le Due Tho demonstrated that he was as inge- 
nious at finding solutions as he had been obdurate during his period of 
stonewalling. He even changed his opening speech, which, though no 
shorter than before, turned into an exhortation to make progress. He did 
not, however, permit the onset of serious negotiations to limit his procliv- 
ity for making himself obnoxious. A sentence that he delivered unalter- 
ably each morning as part of his new litany was: “You make a big effort 
and we will make a big effort.” One morning, he dropped the adjective, 
saying that America should make a big effort and that he would recipro- 
cate with an effort. As a way of breaking the monotony, I called his 
attention to the omission. “I am so glad you noticed it,” said my imper- 
turbable interlocutor. “But yesterday we made a big effort and you only 
made an effort. So today we reverse the procedure: you have to make a 
big effort and we shall only make an effort.” 

Part of the trouble was that Le Due Tho had only one objective, 
whereas, as a superpower, America had to have many. Le Due Tho was 
determined to culminate his revolutionary career in victory; America had 
to balance domestic against international considerations, the future of 
Vietnam against maintaining America’s global role. Le Due Tho handled 
the American psyche as a skilled surgeon might operate on his patient; 
the Nixon Administration was obliged to fight on so many fronts that it 
only rarely had the opportunity to conduct an offensive diplomacy. 

Indeed, from the outset and throughout the negotiations, the Nixon 
Administration had to devote an extraordinary amount of energy to fend- 
ing off attacks upon its good faith. Despite the many unilateral, unrecipro- 
cated gestures Nixon had already made to Hanoi, the President incurred 
almost immediately upon taking office the criticism that he was not suffi- 
ciently dedicated to peace. By September 1969, the United States had 
offered the NLF participation in the political process and mixed electoral 
commissions, had withdrawn more than 10 percent of its forces, and had 
agreed to the total withdrawal of the remainder after a settlement — 
without having anything more to show for these concessions than endless 
repetitions of the communists’ standard recitation of their demand for 
unilateral withdrawal and the overthrow of the Saigon government. 

Nevertheless, on September 25, 1969, Republican Senator Charles 
Goodell of New York proclaimed that he would introduce a resolution 
requiring the withdrawal of all American forces from Vietnam by the end 
of 1970. On October 15, so-called Moratorium demonstrations took place 


687 



Diplomacy 


all across the country. A crowd of 20,000 gathered at a noontime rally in 
New York’s financial district to hear Bill Moyers, who had been President 
Johnson’s assistant and Press Secretary, condemn the war. Thirty thousand 
gathered on the New Haven Green. Fifty thousand amassed on the Wash- 
ington Monument grounds, within sight of the White House. In Boston, 
100,000 people converged on the Common to listen to Senator McGovern 
while a skywriting plane drew a peace symbol in the sky overhead to 
suggest that the Administration was rejecting the desirability of peace. 

As embodied in the Peace Movement, American exceptionalism did 
not permit any discussion of the practicalities of extrication, and treated 
attempts to do so as symptomatic of the Administration’s surreptitious 
desire to continue the war. Having transmuted the war into a domestic 
conflict between good and evil at home, the Peace Movement preferred 
— for reasons it viewed as highly moral — America’s collapse in Vietnam 
to an outcome which, precisely because it might be considered “honor- 
able,” might also whet its government’s appetite for further foreign ad- 
ventures. 

This is why it proved impossible to find any common ground between 
the Peace Movement and the Administration. Nixon had reduced the 
American forces in Vietnam from nearly 550,000 to 20,000 in three years; 
casualties had dropped from some 16,000 or 28 percent of the total in 
1968 to some 600 or some one percent of the total in 1972, the last 
wartime year. This did not ease the distrust or the pain. For the fundamen- 
tal difference could not be bridged: Nixon wanted to leave Vietnam with 
honor and the Peace Movement believed that honor required America to 
leave Vietnam in effect unconditionally. 

If ending the war was the only objective, the Saigon government be- 
came in the eyes of the critics an obstacle to peace rather than an ally. 
The original conviction that South Vietnam was a key element of Ameri- 
can security had been discarded long ago. What remained was the sense 
that, in Vietnam, America was in bad company. The critics’ new orthodoxy 
was that Thieu had to be replaced by a coalition government, if necessary 
by cutting off American funds to South Vietnam. The idea of a coalition 
government turned into the sovereign remedy of the domestic debate at 
the precise moment when the North Vietnamese negotiators were making 
it clear that, according to their definition, a coalition government was a 
euphemism for a communist takeover of the South. 

The North Vietnamese had in fact devised a clever formula for confus- 
ing their American audience. They avowed that their goal was a tripartite 
“coalition” government composed of the NLF (their own pawns), a neu- 
tralist element, and members of the Saigon Administration who stood for 


688 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


“peace, freedom, and independence.” As with so many of Hanoi’s brazen 
maneuvers, one had to read the fine print to determine the real meaning 
of otherwise reasonable-sounding proposals. Only then did it become 
apparent that the three-part body would not govern Saigon but would 
negotiate with the NLF for a final settlement. In other words, a communist- 
dominated body would negotiate with an entirely communist group 
about the political future of South Vietnam. Hanoi was proposing to end 
the war through a dialogue with itself. 

This, however, was not the way the issue appeared in American discus- 
sions. In his book The Crippled Giant, Senator J. William Fulbright as- 
serted that the issue was between rival totalitarians. 5 Senator McGovern, 
who had in 1971 envisioned a “mixed government” in Saigon, in 1972, 
on the verge of being the Democratic presidential candidate, urged a 
withdrawal of U.S. forces, and a cutoff of military aid to South Vietnam. 6 
The Nixon Administration was prepared to risk Thieu’s government in 
internationally supervised free elections. What it refused to do was to 
overthrow an allied government installed by its predecessor in order to 
achieve America’s extrication. 

The Peace Movement’s criterion for success was, simply, whether the 
war was in fact ending. And if the answer was negative, America’s negotiat- 
ing position was deemed to be flawed. The Peace Movement would not 
condemn Hanoi, either for its negotiating positions or for its method of 
conducting the war, thereby giving Hanoi every incentive to stonewall. 
By 1972, the United States had unilaterally withdrawn 500,000 troops. 
Saigon had formally offered to hold free elections and America to with- 
draw all its remaining forces within four months of an agreement. Thieu 
had agreed to resign one month before the elections. The United States 
had proposed the creation of a mixed commission to supervise the elec- 
tions, all of this conditional on an internationally supervised cease-fire 
and the return of prisoners of war. None of these measures abated the 
assault on its motives or policies. 

As the months went by, the domestic debate concentrated increasingly 
on Hanoi’s precondition that the United States unilaterally set a fixed 
withdrawal date as the formula for ending the war. Proposals for fixed 
deadlines for withdrawal quickly became the staple of antiwar Congres- 
sional resolutions (there were some twenty-two in 1971, and thirty-five in 
1972). Their nonbinding nature gave their sponsors the best of all worlds: 
dissociation from the Administration without responsibility for the conse- 
quences. Nothing seemed simpler than ending the war by just withdraw- 
ing from it — except that nothing in Vietnam was ever as simple as it 
appeared. 


689 



Diplomacy 


After meeting with North Vietnamese and NLF negotiators, members of 
the American Peace Movement kept reporting that they “knew” the re- 
lease of prisoners and the settlement of other issues would follow rapidly 
once the United States had committed itself to a fixed, irrevocable dead- 
line for withdrawal. In fact, Hanoi had never made such a promise, adher- 
ing to the same old script with the same tantalizing ambiguities that it had 
used over the 1968 bombing halt. Fixing a deadline would create “favor- 
able conditions” for the solution of other problems, Le Due Tho averred, 
but when it came to actual negotiations, he insisted that the withdrawal 
deadline, once established, would be binding regardless of what hap- 
pened in other negotiations about a cease-fire or the release of prisoners. 
In the real world, Hanoi made the release of prisoners and a cease-fire 
dependent on the overthrow of the Saigon government. As Le Due Tho 
kept explaining as if he were conducting a beginner’s seminar in political 
science, that was why the war was being fought in the first place. 

The greatest irony of the American domestic debate turned out to be 
that Hanoi was in fact totally uninterested in unilateral American with- 
drawal. This point is still misunderstood in much of the literature on the 
war. Until nearly the end, Hanoi never deviated from its standard formula: 
an irrevocable date for American withdrawal coupled with an American 
commitment to overthrow the South Vietnamese government on the way 
out. It was fundamentally uninterested in the nuances of the various 
withdrawal schedules which the well-meaning members of the Congress 
were willing to throw at its feet, except insofar as they fostered American 
divisions. Sweetening the pot by offering a slightly more conciliatory 
withdrawal schedule was not going to change the North Vietnamese posi- 
tion. The outcome of the conflict, to Hanoi’s way of thinking, would be 
settled by force. It would gladly pocket whatever offers came its way 
without letting them affect its bargaining stance. The critics of the war 
thought that Hanoi would turn reasonable if America showed its willing- 
ness to go the extra mile. In this they were mistaken. Everything Washing- 
ton heard from Hanoi amounted to a circular demand for surrender: 
unconditional withdrawal followed by the overthrow of the existing ad- 
ministration in South Vietnam, its replacement by Hanoi puppets, and 
then, when America was left with no cards to play, a negotiation about 
prisoners who could easily be held back in order to extract further con- 
cessions. 

As things turned out, the withdrawal debate marked a turning point of 
the Vietnam War by demonstrating that many of the Administration’s 
victories were indeed Pyrrhic. Nixon maintained his position on not 
agreeing to a fixed deadline for withdrawal except in return for other 


690 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


essential American objectives. But he had to pay the price of agreeing to 
total withdrawal after his conditions were met. South Vietnam was thus 
put into the position of having to defend itself alone against a more 
implacable enemy than any of America’s other allies faced, and under 
conditions America had never asked any other ally to fulfill. American 
troops have been in Europe for two generations; the armistice in Korea 
has been protected by American forces for over forty years. Only in 
Vietnam did the United States, driven by internal dissent, agree to leave 
no residual forces; in the process, it deprived itself of any margin of safety 
when it came to protecting the agreement that was eventually reached. 

Nixon had laid out the American terms for a settlement in two major 
speeches, on January 25, 1972, and on May 8, 1972. These terms were: 
an internationally supervised cease-fire; the return and accounting of 
prisoners; continuation of economic and military aid to Saigon; and leav- 
ing the political future of South Vietnam to be settled by the Vietnamese 
parties on the basis of free elections. On October 8, 1972, Le Due Tho 
accepted Nixon’s key proposals, and Hanoi finally gave up its demand that 
America collude with it in the installation of a communist government in 
Saigon. It agreed to a cease-fire, the return of all American prisoners, and 
an accounting of the missing-in-action. The Thieu government was left 
intact, and the United States was permitted to continue to furnish it with 
military and economic aid. 

Le Due Tho had heretofore refused even to discuss such terms. This 
was why he introduced the proposal that signified the breakthrough with 
the following statement: 

. . . this new proposal is exactly what President Nixon has himself pro- 
posed: ceasefire, end of the war, release of the prisoners, and troop 
withdrawal . . . and we propose a number of principles on political 
problems. You have also proposed this. And we shall leave to the South 
Vietnamese parties the settlement of these questions. 7 

None of the subsequent tragedies and controversies have been able to 
erase the elation those of us who had been shaping American policy felt 
when we realized that we were on the verge of achieving what we had 
sought through four anguishing years, and that America would not have 
to abandon the people who had relied on it. Nixon had declared on 
innumerable occasions that, once his terms were met, he would settle 
quickly. On August 14, 1972, I had told Thieu that, if Hanoi accepted 
President Nixon’s proposals as they stood, America would rapidly con- 
clude an agreement. We had an obligation to keep our pledge. And we 


691 



Diplomacy 


had little choice but to keep it. Had we procrastinated, Hanoi would have 
published its proposal, forcing the Administration to explain why it had 
rejected its own terms and triggering a Congressional vote to cut off 
funds. 

A combination of factors brought Hanoi to the point of accepting what 
it had consistently rejected: the cumulative depletion of its supplies as a 
result of the mining of North Vietnamese harbors, the attack on the Cam- 
bodian and Laotian sanctuaries in 1970 and 1971, the defeat of its spring 
offensive in 1972, the lack of political support from Moscow and Beijing 
when the Nixon Administration resumed the bombing of the North, and 
the fear that Nixon, once re-elected, would drive matters to a showdown. 

The decisive factor was probably that in assessing the consequences of 
the 1972 presidential election, the careful calculators in Hanoi had for 
once made a major miscalculation. Hanoi seemed to believe that Nixon’s 
all-but-certain overwhelming electoral victory would give him a free hand 
in the prosecution of the war. The Nixon Administration knew that the 
new Congress would be no more friendly to Nixon’s Vietnam policy, and 
probably even more personally hostile toward him. One of the literally 
scores of Congressional resolutions for cutting off funding for the war 
was likely to pass — probably attached to a supplemental bill that would 
have to be introduced early in 1973 to pay for the expenses of defeating 
the communist spring offensive of 1972. 

I greeted the prospect of peace with the hope that it would enable 
America to start the process of national healing and to reforge the biparti- 
san consensus that had shaped postwar American foreign policy. The 
Peace Movement, after all, would have achieved its goal of peace, while 
those who had strived for an honorable outcome could feel satisfied that 
their endurance had paid off. In my briefing, which outlined the terms of 
the final agreement, I reached out to adversaries of four years of domestic 
strife: 


... it should be clear by now that no one in this war has had a monopoly 
of anguish and that no one in these debates has had a monopoly of 
moral insight; and now that at last we have achieved an agreement in 
which the United States did not prescribe the political future to its 
allies, an agreement which should preserve the dignity and the self- 
respect of all the parties, that together with healing the wounds in 
Indochina we can begin to heal the wounds in America. 8 


The slim prospects for national unity had, however, collapsed irretriev- 
ably over the issue of Cambodia. Because Cambodia was the only theater 


692 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


of American combat in Indochina that Nixon had not inherited from his 
predecessors, it inflamed partisan debates, turning them into some of the 
most bitter controversies of the Vietnam era. 

It is not my intention to reopen those controversies here. Their details 
have been dealt with elsewhere. 9 Essentially, the accusations of the Ad- 
ministration’s critics boil down to two central charges: that Nixon gratu- 
itously expanded the war into Cambodia, and that, in the process, 
American policy came to bear principal responsibility for the genocide 
carried out by the communist Khmer Rouge after their victory in 1975. 

The idea that Nixon had frivolously expanded the war was a reincarna- 
tion of the strategic misconception of 1961-62 over Laos, namely that 
America’s role in the war could be confined to South Vietnam even 
though Hanoi was fighting the war in all three countries of the Indo- 
chinese theater. The North Vietnamese army had built up a network of 
sanctuaries inside Cambodia, just across the border from South Vietnam, 
from which it launched division-size attacks on American and South Viet- 
namese forces. The sanctuaries were supplied either via the Ho Chi Minh 
Trail through Laos or via the Cambodian seaport of Sihanoukville — all 
in blatant violation of Cambodian neutrality. As American withdrawals 
accelerated, the military position of both South Vietnam and the American 
forces was bound to become untenable if that logistics network was left 
intact and ever-decreasing American forces were confronted by undimin- 
ished North Vietnamese troops with unlimited outside supplies. The 
Nixon Administration therefore made the tactical decision to attack the 
sanctuary areas by air in 1969, and on the ground in 1970. The air attacks 
were a riposte to a wave of North Vietnamese attacks in the South, which 
were killing 400 Americans a week and were in violation of Hanoi’s 
“understanding” with President Johnson at the time of the 1968 bombing 
halt; the ground attacks were a strategy to protect American troop with- 
drawals, which were reaching 150,000 a year. 

Without challenging the North Vietnamese logistics bases, no conceiv- 
able American withdrawal strategy could have worked. In each instance, 
the American offensive was welcomed by the Cambodian authorities, who 
saw them as a defense of their country’s neutrality; after all, no one had 
invited the North Vietnamese into Cambodia. 

Nonetheless, both American military steps became highly emotional 
issues in the United States, turning into a debate which has long since 
transcended military strategy. Cambodia quickly became assimilated into 
the basic Vietnam debate. The Administration policy reflected a strategy; 
the critique focused on the moral validity of the war itself. This attitude 
was magnified by the nation’s inability to fathom the nature and the 


693 



Diplomacy 


implacability of revolutionary ideology. All evidence shows that the 
Khmer Rouge had been fanatical ideologues as early as their student days 
in Paris in the 1950s. They were determined to uproot and destroy the 
existing Cambodian society and to impose a sort of mad utopia by exter- 
minating everybody with the slightest “bourgeois” education. 10 To allege 
that they had been turned into killers by American actions has the same 
moral stature as would the argument that the Holocaust had been caused 
by American strategic bombing of Germany. 

The purpose of these pages is not to seek a final judgment on matters 
about which passions have run so high that they have, in the interim, 
evolved their own cult literature. But America owes it to itself to recog- 
nize that, whatever the final judgment on the tactical wisdom of American 
decisions in Cambodia, it was, tragically, the Khmer Rouge who did the 
murdering, and the Cambodians who paid the penalty for America’s do- 
mestic divisions. The critics, who made it impossible for America to con- 
tinue assisting the Cambodian government in its efforts to resist the 
Khmer Rouge onslaught, did not realize that a bloodbath would follow 
the cutoff of American aid that they were advocating and finally brought 
about. They were surely horrified by it. Yet their misjudgment of the 
genocidal foe figured far less in their postmortems than did their con- 
demnations of their own compatriots. 

The test of a society is whether it can submerge its differences in the 
pursuit of common objectives, and whether it can keep in mind that 
societies thrive on their reconciliations, not on their conflicts. America 
failed that test in Indochina. 

The wounds were so deep, however, that peace brought little joy. 
Whatever chance there had been for the agreement to become a vehicle 
for national healing was weakened by the three-month interval between 
the time when the initial agreement was reached and the time it was 
signed, and, above all, by the B-52 bombing of the Hanoi area in the 
second half of December 1972. Though civilian damage was minimal, 
the resulting outburst of antiwar demonstrations caused the signing of 
the agreement on January 27, 1973, to elicit, above all, a sense of ex- 
hausted and wary relief. 

For their part, the protesters were not reconciled by Hanoi’s accep- 
tance of America’s peace terms. They feared that, if Nixon’s notion of 
peace with honor was permitted to stand, America might again be 
tempted into the same kind of international overcommitment for which, 
to them, Vietnam had become the despised symbol. Thus, they greeted 
the peace agreement with the same cynicism with which they had viewed 
the conduct of the war and diplomacy. Critics argued variously that the 


694 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


agreement was a political ploy, that the same terms had been available 
four years earlier, and that it was a betrayal of Thieu — notwithstanding 
that the demand that Thieu be overthrown had been a central theme of 
the Peace Movement’s demands for years. 

Nothing could have been further from the truth than the proposition 
that the agreement with Hanoi had been concluded to influence the 
national election. On balance, Nixon had considered concluding an 
agreement before the election a liability; his lead in the polls was unassail- 
able and could only have been jeopardized by a debate about peace 
terms. 11 His motive for going ahead with the agreement was the precise 
opposite of what the critics alleged: he did not want electoral considera- 
tions to stand in the way of an agreement he had repeatedly promised 
the American people would be concluded as soon as the Administration’s 
stated terms had been met. 

One of the more persistent myths about the Nixon Administration’s 
Vietnam policy has been the thesis that Nixon needlessly prolonged the 
war for four years since the same terms could have been obtained four 
years earlier. The problem with this thesis is its obliviousness to all the 
known facts. The historical record demonstrates overwhelmingly that 
America settled quickly as soon as its terms, consistently rejected by the 
North Vietnamese during the previous four years, were accepted. 

In 1975, of course, the American effort in Indochina ended in a debacle 
which might have occurred at any earlier point had America’s objective 
been capitulation. But neither the Administration nor the American peo- 
ple ever sought that objective; in the election campaign of 1968, all of the 
presidential candidates had advocated compromise, not capitulation. In 
1972, the candidate urging capitulation was defeated in a landslide. Even 
so, the reader is free to draw the conclusion in retrospect that capitulation 
should have been the goal in 1969- Nothing in the political campaign of 
1968 suggested that the American people or the political parties favored 
such an outcome. 

The torment did not end with the Paris Agreement. No sooner had the 
war ended than the controversy moved to America’s right to enforce the 
peace. There was not a single senior member of the Nixon Administration 
who did not have doubts about the precariousness of the agreement. We 
had gone to the outer limit of what could be conceded, as Nixon had 
always promised to do. And the domestic turmoil left the Administration 
with little maneuvering room. 

Nevertheless, Nixon and I, along with many senior members of the 
Administration, believed that the military and economic provisions of the 
agreement would enable South Vietnam to resist foreseeable pressures 


695 



Diplomacy 


from the North, provided the North Vietnamese adhered to the portion 
of the agreement that prohibited renewed infiltration. Nixon always rec- 
ognized, however, that violations might occur, and of a magnitude that 
could be neither deterred nor resisted without American assistance. He 
was prepared to encourage North Vietnam to join the international com- 
munity with a program of economic assistance. But if all else failed, the 
use of air power to enforce the agreement was never ruled out, either 
in the minds of members of the Nixon Administration or in its public 
pronouncements. 

With the end of the war, the Administration gritted its teeth for the 
test of strength that experience had taught it was likely to occur over 
implementing the agreement. We took it for granted that we had the right 
—indeed, the responsibility — to defend an agreement in the pursuit of 
which 50,000 Americans had died. Were it otherwise, any peace 
agreement with the United States would be the legal equivalent of capitu- 
lation. Terms that will not be defended amount to surrender. If a nation 
is not permitted to enforce peace terms, it does better to abandon its 
cause simply and openly. Nixon and his key advisers announced their 
intention to defend the agreement on innumerable occasions 12 — for ex- 
ample, on May 3, 1973, in Nixon’s annual Foreign Policy Report: “Such a 
course [massive violations] would endanger the hard won gains for peace 
in Indochina. It would risk revived confrontation with us. 13 ... We have 
told Hanoi, privately and publicly, that we will not tolerate violations of 
the Agreement.” 14 

The pattern of the previous five years repeated itself. Perhaps an un- 
damaged, newly re-elected president could have insisted on the periodic 
sharp military measures which were required to enforce the agreement. 
But with Watergate already gnawing at the presidency, there was no 
chance of that. Even as thousands of North Vietnamese trucks were trav- 
ersing the Ho Chi Minh Trail, nearly 50,000 North Vietnamese troops 
were entering Vietnam, and Hanoi stonewalled on giving an adequate 
accounting for America’s missing-in-action — all of which were acts in 
flagrant violation of the agreement — opponents of the policy that had led 
to the agreement insisted that Nixon had no authority to enforce it, no 
matter how severe the violation. They treated the agreement as if it were 
the unilateral withdrawal they had always advocated. In June 1973, the 
Congress denied further funding “to support directly or indirectly combat 
activities in or over Cambodia, Laos, North Vietnam and South Vietnam 
by United States forces” after August 15, including aerial reconnaissance. 15 
In July 1973, it became clear that there was no Congressional support for 
an economic-assistance program for North Vietnam. 


696 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


The peace agreement was not self-enforcing; no such agreement could 
have been. North Vietnam still aimed for the union of Vietnam under its 
rule, and a piece of paper signed in Paris was not going to alter Hanoi’s 
permanent goals. The Paris Accords had extricated the United States from 
the military conflict in Vietnam, but South Vietnam’s lease on life de- 
pended on American support. The Congress had to decide whether to 
continue a containment-style policy in Indochina after American troops 
left. And it decided against it. 

Even economic assistance to South Vietnam was being throttled. In 
1972, the Congress had voted $2 billion in aid; in 1973, the amount was 
reduced to $1.4 billion, and in 1974, it was cut in half, even though oil 
prices had quadrupled. By 1975, the Congress was discussing a terminal 
grant of $600 million. Cambodia was cut off altogether, with the argument 
that it would help save lives — a euphemism for abandonment, and a grim 
joke in light of the genocide that followed. In 1975, Cambodia and South 
Vietnam were overrun by the communists within two weeks of each 
other, putting an end to America’s emotional misery but not to Indo- 
china’s. 

American idealism, the inspiration of so much of the postwar world 
order, had defeated itself with its own weapons. Four presidents had 
defined Vietnam as being vital to American security. Two presidents of 
different parties had identified America’s honor with not abandoning 
those who had relied on America’s pronouncements. Nixon had won the 
1972 election in a landslide on the basis of just such propositions. In 
classic American fashion, both sides in the debate over Vietnam had 
perceived their goals in terms of moral absolutes and never found a 
means of bridging the gulf between them. 

Even after twenty years, the American public debate has not attained an 
objective perspective and still seems more eager to assign blame than to 
draw lessons from the experience. The communist victory rapidly settled 
one of the perennial debates of the Vietnam War era — whether the spec- 
ter of the expected bloodbath in the wake of a communist takeover was 
a figment of the policymakers’ search for pretexts to continue the war. 

In Cambodia, of course, genocide did occur. The new rulers killed at 
least 15 percent of their own population. In Vietnam, the suffering was 
less drastic. Still, hundreds of thousands of South Vietnamese were 
herded into “re-education camps,” another name for concentration 
camps. In early 1977, communist authorities admitted to holding 50,000 
political prisoners, though most independent observers believed the true 
figure to be closer to 200, 000. 16 With respect to the so-called National 
Liberation Front of South Vietnam (the NLF), which had been advertised 


697 



Diplomacy 


in the West for a decade as the putative centerpiece of a democratic 
coalition government, the conquering North Vietnamese made it clear 
that their actual plans were quite different. In 1969, the NLF had been 
transmogrified into the so-called Provisional Revolutionary Government 
of the Republic of South Vietnam, or the PRG. In June 1975, two months 
after the fall of Saigon, the PRG “Cabinet” met and decided upon a limited 
restoration of banking facilities in South Vietnam; advisory committees 
were set up to help manage the country, including some noncommunist 
politicians who had opposed Thieu; the PRG established diplomatic rela- 
tions with eighty-two countries. 

There was nothing Hanoi wanted less, however, than an independent 
South Vietnam, even a communist one; the temptations of Titoism would 
be nipped in the bud. The “Cabinet” decision was quickly rescinded, the 
advisory committees were given no role, and PRG ambassadors were 
never sent abroad. The government of South Vietnam remained in the 
hands of local military committees run by the North Vietnamese Commu- 
nist Party and military officials. By June 1975, Hanoi’s leaders and press 
began a publicity campaign calling for early reunification of the country 
— that is, formal annexation of the South — which was accomplished 
within a year. 17 

Although, in a stria sense, the only dominoes which fell were Cambo- 
dia and Laos, anti-Western revolutionaries in many other areas of the 
globe began to feel emboldened. It is doubtful that Castro would have 
intervened in Angola, or the Soviet Union in Ethiopia, had America not 
been perceived to have collapsed in Indochina, to have become demoral- 
ized by Watergate, and to have afterward retreated into a cocoon. At the 
same time, it has been argued with considerable plausibility that, had 
South Vietnam fallen in the early 1960s, the communists’ attempted coup 
in Indonesia, which nearly succeeded in 1965, might have overthrown 
the government and produced another strategic disaster. 

America, at any rate, paid a price for its adventure in Vietnam that was 
out of proportion to any conceivable gain. It was clearly a mistake to have 
staked so much on such ill-defined causes. America had become involved 
in the first place because it applied literally the maxims of its successful 
European policy to a region with radically different political, social, and 
economic conditions. Wilsonian idealism permitted no cultural differenti- 
ation, while the theory of colleaive security held that, security being 
indivisible, the fabric of the entire international order would unravel if 
even one strand were pulled out. 

Too idealistic to base its policy on national interest, and too focused 
on the requirements of general war in its strategic doctrine, America was 


698 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


unable to master an unfamiliar strategic problem in which the political 
and military objectives were entwined. Imbued with the belief in the 
universal appeal of its values, America vastly underestimated the obstacles 
to democratization in a society shaped by Confucianism, and among a 
people who were struggling for political identity in the midst of an assault 
by outside forces. 

Perhaps the most serious, and surely the most hurtful, domino which 
fell as a result of the Vietnam War was the cohesion of American society. 
American idealism had imbued both officials and critics with the miscon- 
ception that Vietnamese society could be transformed relatively easily 
and quickly into an American-style democracy. When that optimistic prop- 
osition collapsed and it became apparent that Vietnam was far from being 
a democracy, disillusionment was inevitable. There was also a nearly 
incomprehensible misconception about the nature of the military prob- 
lem. Lacking criteria for judgment, officials often misunderstood, and 
therefore often misstated, the issues. But when these officials claimed to 
be seeing a light at the end of the tunnel, that in fact was what most of 
them perceived. However misguided their assessments, they had above 
all deceived themselves. 

It is always the case that issues which reach top policymakers are 
generally complex; simple, noncontroversial matters are settled at lower 
levels of the government by consensus. Yet, once a decision is made, 
however great his inner doubt about it, the policymaker becomes totally 
committed; hence the appearance of assurance with which it may be 
presented can be quite misleading. Moreover, this false impression is 
frequently compounded by the tendency of bureaucracies to embellish 
their own achievements. 

Exposing intentional misrepresentation by the Executive Branch of our 
government is a crucial function of the media and of the Congress. There 
is no excuse for deliberate misrepresentation. But there is little basis for 
the claim that the basic issues of Vietnam were affected by the so-called 
credibility gaps. America had charged into Vietnam with all its flags flying; 
no one had sneaked it into Vietnam. The Congress was aware of the level 
of America’s commitment, and it had voted the necessary appropriations 
year after year. To have wanted to prevent the communist takeover of a 
new nation may have been naive, but it ought not to have led to the 
assault on America’s core values which became such a central part of the 
national debate. 

These bitter controversies continue to confuse the issue of what actu- 
ally happened in Indochina, creating an intellectual vacuum about a pe- 
riod extending over two decades and four administrations of both 


699 



Diplomacy 


political parties. America will only recover from Vietnam when it begins 
to draw some bipartisan lessons from that searing experience. 

First, before the United States commits itself to combat, it should have 
a clear understanding of the nature of the threat it will be confronting 
and of the objectives it can realistically reach. It must have a clear military 
strategy and an unambiguous definition of what constitutes a successful 
political outcome. 

Second, when America commits itself to military action, there can be 
no alternative to victory, as General Douglas MacArthur advised. Qualms 
cannot be stilled by hesitant execution; prolonged stalemate will sap the 
endurance and hence the will of the American public. This requires a 
careful elaboration of political goals and the military strategy to achieve 
them before the decision is made to go to war. 

Third, a democracy cannot conduct a serious foreign policy if the con- 
tending factions within it do not exercise a minimum of restraint toward 
each other. Once victory over domestic opponents becomes the sole 
objective of a policy, cohesion evaporates. Nixon was convinced that it 
was the president’s ultimate responsibility to defend the national interest, 
even if this went against his country’s own passionate dissenters — per- 
haps especially then. Yet Vietnam showed that presidents cannot conduct 
war by executive fiat. Faced with violent demonstrations, Congressional 
resolutions progressively edging toward unilateral withdrawal, and the 
hostility of the media, Nixon should have gone to the Congress early in 
his term, outlined his strategy, and demanded a clear-cut endorsement of 
his policy. If he could not obtain that endorsement, he should have 
asked for a vote to liquidate the war and made the Congress assume 
responsibility. 

As mentioned earlier, Nixon rejected such advice because he felt that 
history would never forgive the appalling consequences of what he con- 
sidered an abdication of executive responsibility. It was an honorable — 
indeed, a highly moral and intellectually correct — decision. But in the 
American system of checks-and-balances, the burden which Nixon took 
upon himself was not meant to be borne by just one man. 

In the Vietnam period, America was obliged to come to grips with its 
limits. For most of its history, America’s exceptionalism had proclaimed a 
moral superiority which was backed by the nation’s material abundance. 
But in Vietnam, America found itself involved in a war which became 
morally ambiguous, and in which America’s material superiority was 
largely irrelevant. The picture-perfect families gracing the television 
screens of the 1950s had been the cultural support group for the moral 
high-mindedness of Dulles and the soaring idealism of Kennedy. 


700 



Vietnam: The Extrication 


Thwarted in these aspirations, America searched its soul and turned on 
itself. Surely no other society would have had comparable confidence in 
its ultimate cohesiveness to thus rip itself apart, certain that it could put 
itself together again. No other people would have been so cavalier about 
risking breakdown in order to spark renewal. 

In terms of immediate outcome, the domestic drama was a tragedy; 
however, in the long run, the anguish could turn into the price America 
had to pay in order to relate its moral perfectionism, which has inspired 
so many great American efforts, to the necessities of an international 
environment less hospitable and more complex than any in the past. 

The experience of Vietnam remains deeply imprinted on the American 
psyche, while history has seemingly reserved for itself some of its most 
telling lessons. After its soul-searching, America recovered its self-confi- 
dence, and the Soviet Union, despite its monolithic appearance, paid a 
mortal penalty for moral, political, and economic overreaching. After a 
spurt of expansionism, the Soviet Union found itself mired in contradic- 
tion and finally collapsed. 

These developments evoke some rather ironic reflections on the na- 
ture of history’s lessons. The United States went into Vietnam in order to 
stop what it considered a centrally directed communist conspiracy, and it 
failed. From America’s failure, Moscow drew the conclusion which the 
advocates of the Domino Theory had so feared — that the historical corre- 
lation of forces had shifted in its favor. As a result, it tried to expand into 
Yemen, Angola, Ethiopia, and ultimately Afghanistan. But in the process, 
it found that geopolitical realities applied just as much to communist 
societies as they did to the capitalist ones. In fact, being less resilient, 
Soviet overextension produced, not catharsis, as it did in America, but 
disintegration . 18 

The question remains whether events would have moved in the same 
direction had America simply remained passive and relied on the evolu- 
tion of history to take care of the communist challenge. Or would such a 
renunciation have conferred an impetus and a conviction of inevitable 
victory on the communist world that would have been sufficient to delay, 
perhaps even to arrest, the Soviet collapse? 

Whatever the academic answer, the statesman cannot adopt abdication 
as a principle of policy. He may learn to moderate his confidence in his 
assessments and to allow for the unforeseeable; but relying on the even- 
tual collapse of a threatening adversary is a policy that offers no solace to 
the millions of immediate victims, and turns policymaking into a reckless 
gamble on intuition. 

America’s anguish over Vietnam was an extraordinary testament to its 


701 



Diplomacy 


moral scruples, which is itself a good answer to all the questions about 
the ethical significance of the American experience. After a relatively brief 
interval, Americans recovered their bearing in the 1980s. By the 1990s, 
free peoples everywhere were again looking to America for guidance in 
constructing yet another new world order. And their greatest fear was not 
America’s overweening involvement in the world but, once again, its 
withdrawal from it. This is why the sadness of the memories of Indochina 
should serve to remind us that American unity is both a duty and the 
hope of the world. 


702 




CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT 

Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: 
Nixon’s Triangular Diplomacy 

For Nixon, the anguishing process of extricating America from Vietnam 
had, in the end, been about maintaining America’s standing in the world. 
Even without that purgatory, a major reassessment of American foreign 
policy would have been in order, for the age of America’s nearly total 
dominance of the world stage was drawing to a close. America’s nuclear 
superiority was eroding, and its economic supremacy was being chal- 


703 


Diplomacy 


lenged by the dynamic growth of Europe and Japan, both of which had 
been restored by American resources and sheltered by American security 
guarantees. Vietnam finally signaled that it was high time to reassess 
America’s role in the developing world, and to find some sustainable 
ground between abdication and overextension. 

On the other side of the ledger, new opportunities for American diplo- 
macy were presenting themselves as serious cracks opened up in what 
had been viewed throughout the Cold War as the communist mono- 
lith. Khrushchev’s revelations in 1956 of the brutalities of Stalin’s rule, 
and the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, had weakened the 
ideological appeal of communism for the rest of the world. Even more 
important, the split between China and the Soviet Union undermined 
Moscow’s pretense to be the leader of a united communist movement. 
All of these developments suggested that there was scope for a new 
diplomatic flexibility. 

For twenty years, Wilsonian idealism had enabled American leaders to 
conduct their global role with missionary vigor. But the America of the 
late 1960s — stalemated in Indochina and torn by domestic conflict — 
required a more complex and nuanced definition of its international 
enterprise. Wilson had guided a country that was new to international 
affairs and confident in its ability to follow any problem through to its 
final resolution; Nixon inherited a society rent by frustration, whose fu- 
ture would depend on its ability to frame attainable long-term goals and 
to persevere in those goals even in the face of adversity without yielding 
to self-doubt. 

Richard Milhous Nixon had inherited near-civil war conditions. Deeply 
suspicious of the Establishment, and in return mistrusted by many of its 
representatives, he nevertheless held fast to the conviction that the 
world’s leading democracy could neither abdicate its responsibilities nor 
resign from its destiny. Few presidents have been as complex as Nixon: 
shy, yet determined; insecure, yet resolute; distrustful of intellectuals, yet 
privately deeply reflective; occasionally impetuous in his pronounce- 
ments, yet patient and farsighted in his strategic design, Nixon found 
himself in the position of having to guide America through the transition 
from dominance to leadership. Often ungenerous in his pronouncements 
and incapable of projecting personal warmth, Nixon nevertheless ful- 
filled, under the most difficult circumstances, the crucial test of leadership 
by moving his society from the familiar into a world it had never known. 

No American president possessed a greater knowledge of international 
affairs. None except Theodore Roosevelt had traveled as much abroad, or 
attempted with such genuine interest to understand the views of other 
leaders. Nixon was not a student of history in the same way that Churchill 


704 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


or de Gaulle had been. He generally learned just enough about a coun- 
try’s past to absorb the rudiments of the facts pertaining to its circum- 
stances — and often not even that much. Yet he had an uncanny ability to 
grasp the political dynamics of any country that had seized his attention. 
And his understanding of the geopolitical realities was truly remarkable. 
Nixon’s handling of domestic politics could at times be distorted by ambi- 
tion and personal insecurity. But when it came to foreign policy, his 
powerful analytical skills and extraordinary geopolitical intuition were 
always crisply focused on the American interest. 

Nixon did not accept the Wilsonian verities about the essential good- 
ness of man or the underlying harmony among nations to be maintained 
by collective security. Wilson had perceived a world progressing inexora- 
bly toward peace and democracy; America’s mission in it was to help the 
inevitable along. For Nixon, the world was divided between friends and 
antagonists; between arenas for cooperation and those in which interests 
clashed. In Nixon’s perception, peace and harmony were not the natural 
order of things but temporary oases in a perilous world where stability 
could only be preserved by vigilant effort. 

Nixon sought to navigate according to a concept of America’s national 
interest — repugnant as that idea was to many traditional idealists. If the 
major powers, including the United States, pursued their self-interests 
rationally and predictably, Nixon believed — in the spirit of the eigh- 
teenth-century Enlightenment — that an equilibrium would emerge from 
the clash of competing interests. Like Theodore Roosevelt — but unlike 
any other twentieth-century American president — Nixon counted on a 
balance of power to produce stability, and considered a strong America 
essential to the global equilibrium. 

Both of these views were highly unfashionable at the time. Nixon stated 
the following in an interview with Time magazine on January 3, 1972: 

We must remember the only time in the history of the world that we 
have had any extended periods of peace is when there has been bal- 
ance of power. It is when one nation becomes infinitely more powerful 
in relation to its potential competitor that the danger of war arises. So I 
believe in a world in which the United States is powerful. I think it will 
be a safer world and a better world if we have a strong, healthy United 
States, Europe, Soviet Union, China, Japan, each balancing the other, 
not playing one against the other, an even balance. 1 

At the same time, Nixon was reflecting the essential ambivalence of his 
society — so in need of being perceived as hardheaded, yet so dependent 
on drawing inner strength from its traditional idealism. Incongruously, 


705 



Diplomacy 


the president most admired by Nixon — whose own maxims were any- 
thing but Wilsonian — was Woodrow Wilson himself. Every new president 
gets to choose the portraits of predecessors he wishes to hang in the 
Cabinet Room. Nixon chose those of Wilson and Eisenhower. When he 
ordered Wilson’s old desk to be placed in the Oval Office, it was as if 
irony dogged Nixon: the desk which the White House custodian pro- 
duced turned out to be, not Woodrow Wilson’s, but that of Henry Wilson, 
Ulysses Grant’s Vice President. 

Nixon often invoked standard Wilsonian rhetoric. “We do have a des- 
tiny,’’ he said, “to give something more to the world simply than an 
example which other nations in the past have been able to give ... an 
example of spiritual leadership and idealism which no material strength 
or military power can provide .’’ 2 Indeed, he shared the great American 
yearning for a foreign policy devoid of self-interest. 

Speaking for the United States, I can say this: We covet no one else’s 
territory; we seek no dominion over any other people; we seek the 
right to live in peace, not only for ourselves but for all the peoples of 
this earth. Our power will only be used to keep the peace, never to 
break it, only to defend freedom, never to destroy it . 3 

The invocations of altruism by a president who in the same breath in- 
sisted that the future of the world should be decided by five great powers 
pursuing their own national interests represented a novel synthesis of the 
American experience. Nixon took American idealism seriously in the 
sense that he shared Wilson’s passionate internationalism and belief in 
America’s indispensability. But he felt equally obliged to relate America’s 
mission to his own conclusions about the way the world actually worked. 
Even as Nixon wanted his country to stand for Wilson’s values, he was 
also painfully aware that destiny had dealt him the thankless assignment 
of conducting America’s retreat from crusading for those values by send- 
ing its armies around the world. 

Nixon’s point of departure was American exceptionalism, although his 
own extensive acquaintance with foreign leaders had taught him that the 
fewest of them were altruistic; given a truth serum, most of them would 
have opted for a certain amount of calculability in American foreign 
policy, and considered the American national interest more reliable than 
altruism. This was why Nixon preferred to operate on two tracks simulta- 
neously: invoking Wilsonian rhetoric to explain his goals while appealing 
to national interest to sustain his tactics. 

It was ironic that Nixon’s commitment to an American role in the 


706 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


pursuit of world peace should have placed him in opposition to so many 
of his distinguished American contemporaries who had previously been 
identified with Wilsonianism but were now urging policies which, to 
Nixon, amounted to abdication from America’s international role. Nixon, 
well aware that even his own view of America’s global responsibility 
amounted to retrenchment when compared to that of his immediate 
predecessors, saw it as his task to define a sustainable role for an idealistic 
America in an unprecedentedly complex international environment — 
one in which, in Nixon’s mind, Wilsonianism and Realpolitik would 
merge. 

The containment strategy of the early postwar period had projected 
America into the front line of every international crisis; the soaring rheto- 
ric of the Kennedy period had set goals that were beyond America’s 
physical and emotional capacities. As a result, American righteousness 
was turning into self-hatred, and the criticism of overextension into abdi- 
cation. In such an environment, Nixon perceived as his first task putting 
the Vietnam experience into some perspective. The United States re- 
mained essential to international stability, but it would not be able to 
sustain the freewheeling interventionism that had brought over 500,000 
Americans into Indochina without a strategy for victory. The survival of 
mankind ultimately depended on the relationship of the two superpow- 
ers, but the peace of the world depended on whether America could 
distinguish between those responsibilities in which its role was merely 
helpful and those to which it was indispensable, and whether it could 
sustain the latter without tearing itself apart. 

Nixon chose a rather unusual occasion to introduce his answer to these 
dilemmas. On July 25, 1969, he found himself in Guam at the beginning 
of a world trip that would take him from Southeast Asia to Romania. 
Earlier that day, he had witnessed the splashdown, near Johnston Island in 
the Pacific, of the first astronauts to land on the moon. Modern journalism, 
unwilling as it is to linger over even the most novel historical drama, 
requires a new event for every news cycle, especially during presidential 
trips. And Guam was on the other side of the international date line from 
the splashdown (which is why the splashdown is listed as having occurred 
on July 24) and therefore was part of another news cycle. 

Realizing this, Nixon selected that occasion to put forward the princi- 
ples that would guide his country’s new approach to international rela- 
tions. Though Nixon and his advisers had often discussed the new 
approach, there had been no plan to present it to the public on this 
particular occasion. Thus it was to everybody’s amazement, including 
my own, that Nixon announced America’s new criteria for involvement 


707 



Diplomacy 


abroad. 4 Henceforth called the Nixon Doctrine, these were elaborated in 
a November 1969 speech and again in February 1970, in the President’s 
first annual foreign policy report, an innovation of the period in which 
Nixon outlined the basic premises of his foreign policy. 

The Nixon Doctrine dealt with the paradox that America’s two postwar 
military engagements, Korea and Vietnam, had been on behalf of coun- 
tries to which America had no formal commitment, and in regions which 
were technically not covered by alliances. With respect to these regions, 
the Nixon Doctrine sought to navigate between overextension and abdi- 
cation by establishing three criteria for American involvement: 

• The United States would keep its treaty commitments. 

• The United States would “provide a shield if a nuclear power threatens 
the freedom of a nation allied with us or of a nation whose survival we 
consider vital to our security.” 

• In cases involving non-nuclear aggression, the United States would 
“look to the nation directly threatened to assume the primary responsi- 
bility of providing the manpower for defense.” 5 

Reality, however, showed itself resistant to being thus encapsuled in for- 
mal criteria. The assurance that America would keep its commitments 
was boilerplate; like professions of chastity, it has limited plausibility 
since its abandonment is unlikely to be announced before the event. At 
any rate, the key issue in the Nuclear Age was not whether commitments 
would be kept, but how they would be defined and interpreted. The 
Nixon Doctrine offered no guide as to how to solve the allied disputes 
regarding nuclear strategy: whether nuclear weapons would be used and 
— to put it crudely — on whose territory; whether the allies would rely on 
general nuclear war, which primarily affected the superpowers, or on 
some version of “flexible response,” which primarily threatened the terri- 
tories of the victims of aggression. 

The clause stating that the United States would provide a shield for 
countries “vital to our security” if they were threatened by a nuclear 
power contained two ambiguities: if the United States defended countries 
vital to its security only when they were threatened by a nuclear power, 
what would be the United States’ attitude if a country important to its 
security was menaced by a non-nuclear power, or by a nuclear power 
choosing not to use nuclear weapons? And if support was more or less 
automatic in the face of a nuclear threat, was a formal alliance necessary? 

The Nixon Doctrine also required threatened countries to assume a 
larger burden of their own conventional defense. But what would 


708 



Foreicn Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


America do if a threatened country gambled on American support regard- 
less of its failure to share the burdens of defense — especially in the face 
of pressure by a nuclear power? Ironically, the Nixon Administration’s 
emphasis on the national interest had the potential to supply an incentive 
for nations to ignore its injunction to make greater defense efforts. For, if 
the national interest was indeed the principal guide, America would be 
obliged to defend any area considered essential to its security without 
regard for the victim’s merit or its contribution to the common defense. 
Herein lay all the dilemmas which later came into prominence under the 
rubric of allied burden-sharing. 

The Nixon Doctrine was, therefore, primarily relevant to crises in pe- 
ripheral areas not covered by formal alliances and threatened by Soviet 
surrogates, of which, as it turned out, there were very few. In its attempt 
to devise a “doctrine” for avoiding another conflict like Vietnam, the 
Nixon Administration developed a doctrine which applied primarily to 
situations like Vietnam which it was determined not to repeat. 

Still, by the time Nixon came into office, East-West relations were them- 
selves in obvious need of reassessment. The conflict with the Soviet 
Union had propelled America into global engagement, and it was the 
strategy of that conflict that needed to be reconsidered in light of the 
trauma of Vietnam. What made the reassessment so difficult was that, 
throughout the Cold War, much of the domestic debate over containment 
had been conducted in classically American categories that excluded geo- 
politics, with one group seeing foreign policy as a subdivision of theology 
and its opponents viewing foreign policy as a subdivision of psychiatry. 

The fathers of containment — Acheson and Dulles and their colleagues 
— had, for all their sophistication on international affairs, conceived of 
their handiwork in essentially theological terms. Since they deemed the 
Soviet proclivity for world domination to be congenital, they did not 
consider Soviet leaders as suitable negotiating partners until the Kremlin 
had abandoned its ideology. And since the principal task of American 
foreign policy was seen as achieving the overthrow of the Soviets, com- 
prehensive negotiations, or even a diplomatic blueprint for them, were 
pointless (if not immoral) until “positions of strength” had brought about 
a change in Soviet purposes. 

A society devoid of experience with irreconcilable conflict and pos- 
sessing an overwhelming faith in compromise as a solvent of disputes 
found it difficult to muster the patience for so stark a course. Many who 
believed in Acheson’s and Dulles’ moral premises tried to speed up the 
timetable for negotiations by claiming that the Soviet system had already 
transformed itself, or was about to do so. The American public’s yearning 


709 



Diplomacy 


for an end to confrontation made even the tough school of containment 
vulnerable to changes in atmospherics, as was reflected in the so-called 
spirits of Geneva and Camp David while Dulles was Secretary of State. 

According to the “psychiatric school,” the Soviet leaders were not so 
different from the American in their desire for peace. They acted intransi- 
gent^ partly because the United States had made them feel insecure. The 
“psychiatric school” urged patience in order to strengthen the peace- 
loving segment of the Soviet leadership, which was said to be divided 
between hawks and doves in much the same way that the American 
government was. The national debate turned increasingly to the magni- 
tude of the supposed Soviet internal change without being able to resolve 
the original dilemma, which was that the containment policy, knowing 
no middle ground between confrontation and the status quo, had never 
answered the question of what to negotiate about. 

By the early 1970s, both of these schools of thought were being chal- 
lenged by a new radicalism. The Henry Wallace approach of the 1940s 
had been reincarnated and bore new labels, invoking a far more startling 
rhetoric which stood containment on its head. Not only did it argue, as 
its precursors had, that America had no moral right to oppose commu- 
nism, but it asserted that opposition to communism actually strengthened 
communism. According to the new radicalism, communism did not need 
to be contained but survived. For, in the end, history itself would defeat 
it, if it merited defeat. 

Describing a march on Washington, the novelist Norman Mailer sum- 
marized that point of view while advocating unconditional withdrawal 
from Vietnam: 


... if the Communists prevailed in Asia . . . divisions, schisms, and sects 
would appear. . . . Therefore, to leave Asia would be precisely to gain 
the balance of power. . . . [T]he more Communism expanded, the more 
monumental would become its problems, the more flaccid its preoccu- 
pations with world conquest. In the expansion of Communism, was its 
own containment. 6 

In maintaining that communism could best, and perhaps only, be de- 
feated by its victories rather than by American opposition, the new radi- 
calism preached the exact opposite of containment. Overextension being 
the root of communist weakness, the more communism advanced, the 
more surely it would collapse. The contention that in America s absten- 
tion from resistance to communism lay the seeds of victory over it was 
indeed a novelist’s paradox. 


710 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


Mailer’s poetics were reinforced by far more sophisticated academic 
analysts who did not express themselves quite so idiosyncratically. The 
“convergence theory,” espoused by such intellectual heavyweights as 
John Kenneth Galbraith, 7 in effect asserted that it was senseless for 
America to run huge risks in opposing communism when the two socie- 
ties were destined to become more and more alike in the natural course 
of events. 

East- West relations had reached a dead end. The traditional concept of 
containment had led to a diplomatic stalemate. Its principal alternative 
was a heresy that required the abandonment of all the premises of a 
generation of commitment. Yet no responsible American president could 
simply turn the fate of his country over to the presumed forces of history. 
It was, after all, no consolation to Carthage that a few hundred years after 
it was razed by Roman conquerors, Rome, too, disappeared. 

Nixon rejected all three schools of thought and set about to establish 
the national interest as the basic criterion for long-range American for- 
eign policy. The most important vehicle for this effort was the annual 
presidential foreign policy report. Four such annual reports on American 
foreign policy were issued starting in 1970. Drafted by my staff and me, 
these reports reflected the President’s views and were issued in Nixon’s 
name. As with all such statements, authorship is less significant than the 
president’s assumption of responsibility for them. Although these reports 
put forward the conceptual approach of the new administration, they 
were not fully successful in this. The media, geared to events rather than 
to concepts, ignored them for the most part, except for the sections 
relating to Vietnam. And foreign leaders treated them as staff products 
with which they would deal when the circumstances to which the reports 
referred actually arose. 

Nevertheless, for the student of the period they constitute the best road 
map for the foreign policy of the Nixon era, and would have done so for 
journalists and foreign leaders who, as it turned out, missed many an 
obvious hint by focusing on the day-to-day stuff of diplomatic exchanges. 
The basic theme of the reports was that American foreign policy would 
henceforth be geared to an analysis of the national interest, and that 
America would engage itself for political causes rather than the exegesis 
of legal principles. The President’s first annual report on foreign policy, 
on February 18, 1970, expressed this view: 

Our objective, in the first instance, is to support our interests over the 
long run with a sound foreign policy. The more that policy is based on 
a realistic assessment of our and others’ interests, the more effective 


711 



Diplomacy 


our role in the world can be. We are not involved in the world because 
we have commitments; we have commitments because we are involved. 
Our interests must shape our commitments, rather than the other way 
around. 8 

In a British or French state paper, such statements would have passed for 
truisms, and it would not have been deemed necessary to make a special 
point of them. In America, it was unprecedented for a president to stake 
his policy on the explicit affirmation of the national interest. None of 
Nixon’s predecessors in this century — with the exception of Theodore 
Roosevelt — had treated American idealism as one factor among many, or 
the future in terms of permanent engagement as opposed to specific 
crusades with fixed terminal points. 

In dealing with the Soviet Union, the report stated, American policy 
would be based on a precise understanding of the nature of the Soviet 
system that neither underestimated the depth of communist ideological 
commitment nor fell prey to the illusion that communist leaders “have 

already given up their beliefs or are just about to do so ” 9 Nor would 

America permit itself to become emotionally dependent on relations with 
the Soviet Union. The criterion for progress would be substance ex- 
pressed in precise agreements reflecting mutual interests and not atmo- 
spherics. Above all, relaxation of tensions had to proceed on a broad 
front: 

We will regard our Communist adversaries first and foremost as nations 
pursuing their own interests as they perceive these interests, just as we 
follow our own interests as we see them. We will judge them by their 
actions as we expect to be judged by our own. Specific agreements, 
and the structure of peace they help build, will come from a realistic 
accommodation of conflicting interests. 10 

The 1971 report repeated the same theme: “The internal order of the 
USSR, as such, is not an object of our policy, although we do not hide our 
rejection of many of its features. Our relations with the USSR, as with 
other countries, are determined by its international behavior.” 11 

The emphasis on national interest was to come under intense conserva- 
tive attack, especially after the Vietnam War ended and the urge for a 
release from international tensions had abated. The real issue was not, 
however, whether Nixon placed too much reliance on Soviet leaders, as 
the criticism had it at the time — which was absurd given Nixon’s empha- 
sis on concreteness and his pessimistic view of human nature — but on 


712 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


the strategy best suited to stopping Soviet expansionism. Nixon believed 
that, amidst the turmoil of Vietnam, the national interest provided the 
best criterion for resisting communist expansionism and retaining public 
support. His critics considered the emphasis on national interest as a 
form of moral disarmament. 

In its determination to prevent further extension of the communist 
sphere, the Nixon Administration’s views were indistinguishable from 
those of Acheson and Dulles preceding it, or from those of Reagan that 
followed. Even while the Vietnam War was raging, the Nixon Administra- 
tion reacted neuralgically to any perceived geopolitical or strategic threat 
from the Soviet Union: in 1970, over the building of a Soviet naval base 
in Cuba, over the movement of Soviet surface-to-air missiles toward the 
Suez Canal, and in response to the Syrian invasion of Jordan; in 1971, 
over the Soviet role in the India-Pakistan War; and in 1973, against an 
implied threat by Brezhnev to intervene militarily in the Arab-Israeli War. 
The attitude continued into the Ford Administration in reaction to the 
dispatch of Cuban troops to Angola. 

At the same time, the Nixon Administration’s approach to containment 
differed from that of Acheson and Dulles in that it did not make the 
transformation of Soviet society a precondition to negotiations. Nixon 
parted company with the fathers of containment and chose a path remi- 
niscent of Churchill, who in 1953 had called for talks with Moscow after 
Stalin’s death. Nixon believed that the process of negotiations and a long 
period of peaceful competition would accelerate the transformation of 
the Soviet system and strengthen the democracies. 

What Nixon defined as an era of negotiations served as a strategy for 
enabling America to regain the diplomatic initiative while the war in 
Vietnam was still in progress. Nixon’s goal was to keep the Peace Move- 
ment confined to the issue of Vietnam and to prevent it from paralyzing 
every aspect of American foreign policy. Nor was Nixon’s approach pri- 
marily tactical. He and his advisers believed that a quite possibly tempo- 
rary confluence of interest in eased tensions existed between the two 
nuclear superpowers. The nuclear balance seemed to be approaching a 
kind of stability, or could be made to do so either unilaterally or by 
arms control negotiations. America needed breathing room in order to 
extricate itself from Vietnam and to construct a new policy for the post- 
Vietnam era, while the Soviet Union had perhaps even stronger reasons 
for seeking a respite. The buildup of Soviet divisions on the Chinese 
border implied that a Soviet Union faced with tensions on two fronts 
thousands of miles apart might well be ready to explore political solu- 
tions with America, especially if we succeeded in the opening to China — 


713 



Diplomacy 


which was a keystone of Nixon’s strategy. Whatever its ideological convic- 
tions, the Soviet leadership might develop enough of a stake in Western 
relations to defer confrontation. In our view, the longer the Soviet con- 
frontation with the West was delayed, the more unmanageable would 
become the task of holding together the Soviet Empire, especially since 
its political problems were compounded by economic stagnation. In 
other words, Nixon and his advisers believed that time was on the side of 
the United States, not of the communist world. 

Nixon’s view of Moscow was more nuanced than that of his predeces- 
sors. He did not see relations with the Soviet Union as an all-or-nothing 
proposition but as a mixed bag of issues with varying degrees of solubil- 
ity. He endeavored to weave together all the many elements of the super- 
power relationship into an overall approach that was neither totally 
confrontational (like that of the “theologians”) nor totally conciliatory 
(like that of the “psychiatrists”). The idea was to emphasize those areas 
in which cooperation was possible, and to use that cooperation as lever- 
age to modify Soviet behavior in areas in which the two countries were 
at loggerheads. That, and not the caricatures which came to characterize 
the subsequent debate, was what the Nixon Administration understood 
by the word “detente.” 

There were many obstacles impeding this policy of “linkage,” as it was 
dubbed — linking cooperation in one area to progress in another. The 
near-obsession with arms control among many influential Americans 
proved to be one such snag. The disarmament negotiations of the 1920s, 
which had been focused on reducing arms to nonthreatening levels, had 
failed disastrously. That goal had become even more complex in the 
Nuclear Age, because a “safe” level of nuclear weapons was almost a 
contradiction in terms. Nor could anyone imagine how to verify the re- 
quired low levels in a territory as vast as the Soviet Union. Only as the 
Cold War was coming to an end did real reductions occur. But throughout 
the 1960s and 1970s, disarmament was subordinated to efforts to reduce 
specific, definable dangers, of which the most prominent was the effort 
to prevent a surprise attack — an enterprise that went under the name of 
arms control. 

Policymakers had not expected that reducing the risk of surprise attack 
would emerge as a key issue in arms control negotiations. Common sense 
seemed to suggest that the vast destructive potential of the superpowers 
would cancel each other out and that each side would always be able to 
inflict unacceptable damage no matter what its adversary did. Then, in 
1959, in one of the truly original articles of the Cold War period, the then 
Rand Corporation analyst Albert Wohlstetter showed that common sense 


714 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


was not an adequate guide to nuclear relationships. The fact that nuclear 
weapons were carried on airplanes concentrated on a relatively few bases 
might make it technically possible to destroy the adversary’s strategic 
forces before they were launched. 12 In such circumstances, the attacking 
side might be able to reduce the counterblow to tolerable levels and 
emerge in a position to impose its will. By the same token, the fear of 
surprise attack might tempt preemption — that is, an attack for no other 
purpose than to forestall an anticipated surprise attack. 

According to Wohlstetter, the nuclear balance was in fact highly unsta- 
ble. The presumed gap between what came to be called first- and second- 
strike capabilities turned into the obsession of defense analysts and arms 
control experts. The idea developed that both sides might have an interest 
in negotiating arrangements to protect themselves against their ultimate 
danger. Academic seminars at Harvard, MIT, Stanford, and Cal Tech elabo- 
rated theories and practical proposals on arms control and strategic stabil- 
ity which were to sustain policymakers for the next two decades. 

Wohlstetter’s article did for strategic analysis what Kennan’s “X” article 
had achieved for political analysis in 1947. Ever after, the diplomacy of 
arms control concentrated on limiting the composition and operating 
characteristics of strategic forces to reduce the incentive for surprise 
attack to a minimum. 

But arms control introduced complexities of its own. The subject was 
so esoteric that it multiplied the anxieties of both policymakers and the 
public at large. For one thing, it oversimplified the nature of the problem. 
The decision to initiate nuclear war would not be made by scientists, who 
were familiar with these weapons, but by harassed political leaders, aware 
that the slightest miscalculation would destroy their societies, if not civili- 
zation itself. Neither side had any operational experience with the new 
technology and, in order to prevail in a nuclear war, thousands of nuclear 
warheads would have to be launched simultaneously. During the entire 
Cold War, however, the Soviet Union had never tested more than three 
missiles simultaneously, and the United States had never launched even 
one from an operational silo (because America’s operational silos were 
located in the center of the country, and Washington was afraid of a forest 
fire if a test missile fell to Earth. So much for confidence). 

Thus, the danger of surprise attack was in fact exaggerated by two 
groups with conflicting objectives: those who wanted substantial defense 
budgets to protect against the danger of surprise attack, and those who 
invoked the fear of surprise attack as a reason for shrinking the defense 
budgets. Since the issues were so complex, a premium was placed on 
skills in briefing. And emotions ran so deep that it was not easy to tell 


715 



Diplomacy 


whether experts had been led to their conclusions by scientific study or 
whether they invoked science to support preconceived conclusions — too 
often the latter. Pity the policymaker who became hostage to the advice 
of scientists with widely divergent views, and who had devoted more 
years of study to nuclear issues than the statesman had hours available in 
which to consider them. Debates about such esoteric subjects as vulnera- 
bility, accuracy, and calculability attained the complexity of medieval dis- 
putes about theology while being, in fact, surrogates for long-standing 
philosophical disagreements dating back to the earliest days of contain- 
ment. 

During the most intense debate about arms control in the 1970s, con- 
servative critics warned of the unreliability of Soviet leaders and the 
hostility of Soviet ideology. The advocates of arms control stressed the 
contribution of arms control agreements to a general atmosphere of 
eased relations, quite independently of the merit of the actual agree- 
ments. It was the old debate between the theologians and the psychiatrists 
refurbished in technological garb. 

At first, arms control was simply grafted onto the containment theory. 
Reliance on positions of strength was espoused side by side with an arms 
control concept that purported to make containment less dangerous. As 
time went on, it became evident that arms control also made containment 
more permanent. There was less and less talk of a political settlement, 
and fewer attempts were made to negotiate one. Indeed, the safer the 
world appeared to arms controllers, the less reason statesmen found to 
leave familiar positions for the uncharted sea of political accommodation. 

Crises came and went. Flare-ups occurred from Southeast Asia to the 
Caribbean and Central Europe, but both sides seemed to be waiting for 
the more or less automatic collapse of their adversary under the impact 
of historical evolution. In the interval until it would become apparent 
which side’s view of historical evolution was prevailing, life would be 
made more tolerable by arms control negotiations. It seemed to be an 
environment consecrated to stalemate: the political doctrine (contain- 
ment) had no answer to the arms race, and the strategic theory (arms 
control) offered no solution to the political conflict. 

In this atmosphere, Nixon entered office and was being pressured by 
the Congress and the media to turn rapidly to arms control negotiations 
with the Soviets. He was reluctant to conduct diplomacy as if nothing 
had happened less than six months after Soviet troops had occupied 
Czechoslovakia. At a minimum, he wanted to prevent turning arms con- 
trol into a safety valve for Soviet expansionism. The Nixon Administration 
set out to determine whether the Soviet eagerness to tranquilize an ad- 


716 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


ministration it perceived as being more forceful than its predecessor — 
and therefore more threatening to Soviet interests — could be used to 
elicit Soviet cooperation in removing the threat to Berlin, easing tensions 
in the Middle East, and, above all, ending the war in Vietnam. This ap- 
proach was called “linkage,” and it became wildly controversial. 

One of the principal tasks of statesmanship is to understand which 
subjects are truly related and can be used to reinforce each other. For the 
most part, the policymaker has little choice in the matter; ultimately, it is 
reality, not policy, that links events. The statesman’s role is to recognize 
the relationship when it does exist — in other words, to create a network 
of incentives and penalties to produce the most favorable outcome. 

Nixon expressed these views in a letter to Cabinet members concerned 
with national security on February 4, 1969, two weeks after taking the 
oath of office: 


... I do believe that crisis or confrontation in one place and real coop- 
eration in another cannot long be sustained simultaneously. I recognize 
that the previous Administration took the view that when we perceive a 
mutual interest on an issue with the USSR, we should pursue agreement 
and attempt to insulate it as much as possible from the ups and downs 
of conflicts elsewhere. This may well be sound on numerous bilateral 
and practical matters such as cultural or scientific exchanges. But, on 
the crucial issues of our day, I believe we must seek to advance on a 
front at least broad enough to make clear that we see some relationship 
between political and military issues. 13 


The debate about linkage lasted so long as to obscure just how simple the 
Nixon team’s basic propositions were. The Cold War was an adversarial 
relationship between the two superpowers. Nixon said no more — but 
also no less — than that it was absurd to pick out one area of that relation- 
ship for improvement while confrontation continued in all the others. 
Selective relaxation of tensions seemed to Nixon and his advisers a strat- 
egy guaranteed to undermine the position of the democracies. It made 
no sense that a subject as complex and esoteric as arms control should 
be the test case for the prospects for peace while Soviet arms were 
encouraging conflict in the Middle East and killing Americans in Vietnam. 

The concept of linkage encountered stormy weather in the foreign 
policy community. The American foreign policy bureaucracy is for the 
most part staffed by individuals who have dedicated themselves to what 
is, in American society, a rather unorthodox career so that they may 
promulgate and implement their views of a better world. Their opinions, 


717 



Diplomacy 


moreover, are honed by a system in which policy emerges from bureau- 
cratic struggles which, as Secretary of State George Shultz later pointed 
out, are never finally settled. Segmented into a series of individual, and at 
times isolated, initiatives geared to highly specific problems, American 
foreign policy is rarely approached from the point of view of an overall 
concept. Ad hoc departmental approaches have more — and more pas- 
sionate — spokesmen than does an overall strategy, which often has no 
spokesman at all. It takes an unusually strong and determined president, 
skilled in the ways of Washington, to break this pattern. 

Nixon’s attempt to tie the opening of strategic arms negotiations to 
progress on political issues ran counter to the passionate conviction of 
both the arms controllers, who were eager to limit the arms race, and the 
Kremlinologists, who were, convinced that American foreign policy 
should strengthen the Kremlin doves against the Kremlin hawks in their 
presumed policy disputes. The bureaucracy chipped away at the policy 
outlined in the President’s letter by emphasizing arms control as an end 
in itself in leaks to the press. Though not “authorized,” these leaks were 
also never disavowed. In The New York Times of April 18, 1969, “officials” 
described arms agreements with the Soviet Union as “an overriding goal 
of the Nixon foreign policy.” 14 On April 22, the Times had “American 
diplomats” predicting Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) in June. 15 
On May 13, The Washington Post quoted Administration sources to the 
effect that, by May 29, a date for the opening of talks would be set. 16 These 
cumulative pressures to progress on modifying Nixon’s stated position of 
linking arms control to political issues were never posed as a head-on 
challenge; instead, a series of tactical, day-to-day comments were used to 
edge matters toward the position preferred by the bureaucracy. 

Analysts outside the government were soon launching their own cri- 
tique. On June 3, 1969, The New York Times called American trade restric- 
tions linked to other issues “self-defeating.” They were “cold-war 
policies” which were “inconsistent with the Nixon Administration’s the- 
ory that it is time to move from an era of confrontation into one of 
negotiation and cooperation.” 17 The Washington Post deployed the same 
argument. “Reality is too complex and sticky,” it wrote on April 5, “to 
permit any President to believe he can line up so many different ducks in 
a row. Arms control has a value and urgency entirely apart from the 
status of political issues.” 18 Nixon intended to broaden the dialogue with 
Moscow by delaying the SALT talks. Bureaucratic momentum and philo- 
sophical disagreement combined to expend assets Nixon would have 
preferred to husband. 

It cannot be said that the Administration approach was immediately 
successful. In April 1969, an attempt to send future Secretary of State 


718 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


Cyrus Vance to Moscow with authority to negotiate simultaneously on 
both strategic arms limitations and Vietnam failed. 19 The two issues were 
too incommensurable; the outcome of the strategic arms discussions was 
too uncertain, the Hanoi leadership was too intractable, and the time 
scale required for either negotiation too difficult to synchronize. 

But, in the end, Nixon and his advisers did succeed in making the 
various strands of policy support each other. Linkage began working 
because the Nixon Administration managed to create a major incentive 
for Soviet moderation by achieving a dramatic opening to China. One 
elementary lesson for students of chess is that, in choosing among moves, 
one can do worse than to count the number of squares dominated by 
each choice. Generally, the more squares a player dominates, the greater 
his options and the more constrained become those of his opponent. 
Similarly, in diplomacy, the more options one side has, the fewer will be 
available to the other side and the more careful it will have to be in 
pursuing its objectives. Indeed, such a state of affairs may in time provide 
an incentive for the adversary to seek to end his adversarial role. 

Once the Soviet Union could no longer count on permanent hostility 
between the world’s most powerful and most populous nations — even 
more so if the two were actually perceived as having started to cooperate 
— the scope for Soviet intransigence would narrow and perhaps evapo- 
rate. Soviet leaders would have to hedge their bets because a threatening 
posture might intensify Sino-American cooperation. In the conditions of 
the late 1960s, improved Sino-American relations became a key to the 
Nixon Administration’s Soviet strategy. 

America’s historic feeling of friendship for China collapsed when the 
communists won the civil war in 1949 and entered the Korean War in 
1950. It was replaced by a policy of deliberately isolating the communist 
rulers in Beijing. A telling symbol of this state of mind was Dulles’ refusal 
to shake hands with Zhou Enlai at the 1954 Geneva Conference on Indo- 
china — which still rankled the Chinese Premier when he greeted me in 
Beijing seventeen years later and inquired whether I was one of those 
Americans who refused to shake hands with Chinese leaders. The sole 
remaining diplomatic contact between the two nations was through their 
respective ambassadors in Warsaw, who met at irregular intervals to ex- 
change invectives. During the Chinese Cultural Revolution in the late 
1960s and 1970s — whose cost in human lives and suffering was compara- 
ble to Stalin’s purges — all Chinese ambassadors (except, for some inscru- 
table reason, the one in Egypt) were recalled to China, interrupting the 
Warsaw talks and leaving Washington and Beijing with no diplomatic or 
political contact whatsoever. 

Interestingly enough, the leaders who had first perceived the opportu- 


719 



Diplomacy 


nities inherent in a Sino-Soviet split were the two old men of European 
diplomacy, Adenauer and de Gaulle. Adenauer, relying on a book he had 
just read, started talking about it around 1957, though the Federal Repub- 
lic was not yet in a position to conduct a global policy. De Gaulle felt no 
such restraints. He had correctly perceived in the early 1960s that the 
Soviets had a serious problem along their vast border with China, and 
that this would oblige them to seek a more cooperative relationship with 
the West. Being de Gaulle, he believed that this fact would accelerate a 
Franco-Soviet detente. Given Moscow’s China problem, Moscow and Paris 
could conceivably negotiate away the Iron Curtain and pursue de Gaulle’s 
vision of “Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals.” But de Gaulle’s France 
was not nearly strong enough to carry out such a diplomatic revolution. 
Moscow did not consider Paris an equal partner for detente. However, 
although de Gaulle’s policy prescriptions were distorted by his percep- 
tion of them through the French prism, his underlying analysis was pre- 
scient. For a long time, American policymakers, blinded by ideological 
preconceptions, failed to appreciate that the Sino-Soviet split represented 
a strategic opportunity for the West. 

American opinion on China, such as it was, found itself divided along 
the familiar patterns of the Cold War. A small group of Sinologists treated 
the rift as psychological; they urged America to meet Chinese grievances 
by turning over the Chinese seat in the United Nations to Beijing and 
easing tensions through wide-ranging contacts. The vast majority of in- 
formed opinion, however, considered Communist China incurably ex- 
pansionist, fanatically ideological, and intransigently committed to world 
revolution. America had involved itself in Indochina in large part to blunt 
what had been perceived as a Chinese-led communist conspiracy to take 
over Southeast Asia. Conventional wisdom had it that; even more than 
was the case with the Soviet Union, the Chinese communist system would 
need to be transformed before negotiations could be considered. 

This view was reinforced from an unexpected quarter. Sovietologists, 
who for more than a decade had been urging permanent dialogue with 
Moscow, took a diametrically opposite stand with respect to China. Early 
in Nixon’s first term, a group of former ambassadors to the Soviet Union, 
who were disquieted by Washington’s first tentative feelers toward 
Beijing, called on the President with a solemn warning. The Soviet lead- 
ers, they argued, were so paranoid about Communist China that any 
attempt to improve American relations with Beijing would involve an 
unacceptable risk of confrontation with the Soviet Union. 

The Nixon Administration did not share this view of international rela- 
tions. Excluding a country of the magnitude of China from America’s 


720 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


diplomatic options meant that America was operating internationally with 
one hand tied behind its back. We were convinced that increasing Amer- 
ica’s foreign policy options would soften, not harden, Moscow’s stance. A 
policy statement I drafted for Nelson Rockefeller’s bid for the 1968 Re- 
publican presidential nomination had stated: “. . . I would begin a dia- 
logue with communist China. In a subtle triangle of relations between 
Washington, Peking, and Moscow, we improve the possibilities of accom- 
modations with each as we increase our options toward both.” 20 Nixon 
had put forward identical views even earlier, in language geared to tradi- 
tional American notions of world community. In October 1967, he had 
written in Foreign Affairs: 

Taking the long view, we simply cannot afford to leave China forever 
outside the family of nations, there to nurture its fantasies, cherish its 
hates and threaten its neighbors. There is no place on this small planet 
for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isola- 
tion . 21 

Shortly after receiving the presidential nomination, Nixon became more 
specific. In a magazine interview in September 1968, he stated: “We must 
not forget China. We must always seek opportunities to talk with her, as 
with the USSR. ... We must not only watch for changes. We must seek to 
make changes.” 22 

In the event, Nixon achieved his goal, though China was induced to 
rejoin the community of nations less by the prospect of dialogue with the 
United States than by fear of being attacked by its ostensible ally, the 
Soviet Union. The Nixon Administration, which did not immediately un- 
derstand this dimension of the Sino-Soviet relationship, was alerted 
to it by the Soviet Union itself. It was not the first, or the last, time that 
clumsy Soviet foreign policy accelerated what the Kremlin feared the 
most. 

In the spring of 1969, a series of clashes between Chinese and Soviet 
forces took place on a remote stretch of the Sino-Soviet border along the 
Ussuri River in Siberia. On the basis of the experience of two decades, 
Washington initially took it for granted that these skirmishes had been 
instigated by fanatical Chinese leaders. It was heavy-handed Soviet diplo- 
macy that caused a reassessment. For Soviet diplomats were supplying 
detailed briefings of the Soviet version of events to Washington and in- 
quiring as to what the American attitude would be if these clashes esca- 
lated. 

The unprecedented Soviet eagerness to consult Washington on an issue 


721 



Diplomacy 


with respect to which America had indicated no particular concern 
caused us to ask ourselves whether the briefings might not be designed 
to prepare the ground for a Soviet attack on China. This suspicion became 
reinforced when American intelligence studies triggered by Soviet 
briefings revealed that the skirmishes invariably took place near major 
Soviet supply bases and far from Chinese communications centers — a 
pattern one would expect only if the Soviet forces were in fact the aggres- 
sors. Further credence was given to this analysis by a relentless Soviet 
buildup along the entire 4,000-mile length of the Chinese border, which 
rapidly reached more than forty divisions. 

If the Nixon Administration’s analysis was correct, a major international 
crisis was brewing, even if most of the world was unaware of it. Soviet 
military intervention in China would signal the most serious threat to the 
global balance of power since the Cuban missile crisis. The application 
of the Brezhnev Doctrine to China would mean that Moscow would try 
to make the government in Beijing as submissive as Czechoslovakia’s had 
been obliged to become the previous year. The world’s most populous 
nation would then be subordinate to a nuclear superpower — an ominous 
combination which would restore the dreaded Sino-Soviet bloc, the 
monolithic nature of which had inspired such fear in the 1950s. Whether 
the Soviet Union was capable of realizing so vast a project remained far 
from clear. What was obvious, however — especially to an administration 
basing its foreign policy on a geopolitical conception — was that the risk 
could not be run. If the balance of power is taken seriously, then the very 
prospect of geopolitical upheaval must be resisted; by the time the change 
has occurred, it may well be too late to oppose it. At a minimum, the cost 
of resistance will go up exponentially. 

Such considerations led Nixon to make two extraordinary decisions in 
the summer of 1969- The first was to put aside all the issues which 
constituted the existing Sino-American dialogue. The Warsaw talks had 
established an agenda that was as complex as it was time-consuming. 
Each side stressed its grievances: China’s had to do with the future of 
Taiwan and Chinese assets sequestered in the United States; the United 
States sought the renunciation of force over Taiwan, China’s participation 
in arms-control negotiations, and the settlement of American economic 
claims against China. 

Instead, Nixon decided to concentrate on the broader issue of China’s 
attitude toward a dialogue with the United States. Priority was given to 
determining the scope of the looming Sino-Soviet-American triangle. If 
we could determine what we suspected — that the Soviet Union and China 
were more afraid of each other than they were of the United States — an 


722 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


unprecedented opportunity for American diplomacy would come into 
being. If relations improved on that basis, the traditional agenda would 
take care of itself; if relations did not improve, the traditional agenda 
would remain insoluble. In other words, the practical issues would be 
resolved as a consequence of Sino-American rapprochement, not chart 
the path toward it. 

In implementing the strategy of transforming the two-power world into 
a strategic triangle, the United States announced in July 1969 a series of 
unilateral initiatives to indicate the change in attitude. The prohibition 
against Americans’ traveling to the People’s Republic of China was elimi- 
nated; Americans were allowed to bring $100 worth of Chinese-made 
goods into the United States; and limited American grain shipments were 
permitted to China. These measures, though insignificant in themselves, 
were designed to convey America’s new approach. 

Secretary of State William P. Rogers made these hints explicit in a major 
speech approved by Nixon. He announced in Australia on August 8, 1969, 
that the United States would welcome a significant role by Communist 
China in Asian and Pacific affairs. If Chinese leaders abandoned their 
introspective “view of the world,” America would “open up channels of 
communication.” In the warmest comment about China by an American 
secretary of state in twenty years, Rogers called attention to the unilateral 
initiatives being taken by America in the economic field, steps designed 
“to help remind people on mainland China of our historic friendship for 
them.” 23 

But if there was a real danger of a Soviet attack on China in the summer 
of 1969, there would not be enough time for these complex maneuvers 
to unfold gradually. Therefore, Nixon took perhaps the most daring step 
of his presidency by warning the Soviet Union that the United States 
would not remain indifferent if it were to attack China. Regardless of 
China’s immediate attitude toward the United States, Nixon and his advis- 
ers considered China’s independence indispensable to the global equilib- 
rium, and deemed diplomatic contact with China essential to the 
flexibility of American diplomacy. Nixon’s warning to the Soviets was also 
a tangible expression of his Administration s new emphasis on basing 
American policy on the careful analysis of the national interest. 

Concerned about the Soviet military buildup along the Chinese border, 
Nixon authorized a strong, double-edged statement on September 5, 
1969, to the effect that the United States was “deeply concerned” about a 
Sino-Soviet war. Under Secretary of State Elliot Richardson was charged 
with delivering the message; high enough in the hierarchy to leave no 
doubt that he was speaking on behalf of the President, Richardson was at 


723 



Diplomacy 


the same time not so conspicuous as to challenge the Soviet Union head- 
on: 

We do not seek to exploit for our own advantage the hostility between 
the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic. Ideological differences 
between the two Communist giants are not our affair. We could not fail 
to be deeply concerned, however, with an escalation of this quarrel 
into a massive breach of international peace and security. 24 

When a country abjures its intention of exploiting a conflict between two 
other parties, it is in fact signaling that it has the capacity to do so and that 
both parties would do well to work at preserving that neutrality. So too, 
when a nation expresses its “deep concern” over a military contingency, 
it is conveying that it will assist — in some as yet unspecified way — the 
victim of what it has defined as aggression. Nixon was unique among 
American presidents in this century by thus showing his preparedness to 
support a country with which the United States had had no diplomatic 
relations for twenty years, with which his own Administration had as yet 
had no contact whatsoever on any level, and whose diplomats and media 
were vilifying American “imperialism” at every turn. It marked America’s 
return to the world of Realpolitik. 

To emphasize the new approach, the importance of improved relations 
between China and the United States was stressed in each of the annual 
presidential reports on foreign policy. In February 1970 — before there 
had been any direct contact between Washington and Beijing — the report 
called for practical negotiations with China and stressed that the United 
States would not collude with the Soviet Union against China. This was, 
of course, the reverse side of the warning to Moscow; it implied that 
Washington always had that option if driven to it. The February 1971 
report repeated America’s willingness to establish contact with China, and 
reassured China that America had no hostile intent: 

We are prepared to establish a dialogue with Peking. We cannot accept 
its ideological precepts, or the notion that Communist China must exer- 
cise hegemony over Asia. But neither do we wish to impose on China 
an international position that denies its legitimate national interests. 25 

Once again, the report reiterated America’s neutrality in the conflict be- 
tween the two major communist centers: 

We will do nothing to sharpen that conflict — nor to encourage it. It is 
absurd to believe that we could collude with one of the parties against 
the other 


724 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


At the same time, we cannot permit either Communist China or the 
USSR to dictate our policies and conduct toward the other. . . . [W]e will 
have to judge China, as well as the USSR, not by its rhetoric but by its 
actions. 26 

The ostentatious renunciation of collusion with either of the communist 
giants served as an invitation to each to improve relations with Washing- 
ton, and as a warning to each of the consequences of continued hostility. 
To the extent that both China and the Soviet Union calculated that they 
either needed American goodwill or feared an American move toward its 
adversary, both had an incentive to improve their relations with Washing- 
ton. And both had been told as plainly as was possible — indeed, it was 
there for all to read — that the prerequisite for closer ties with Washington 
was to refrain from posing threats to vital American interests. 

As things turned out, it proved easier to define a new architecture for 
relations with China than it was to implement it. The isolation between 
America and China had been so total that neither knew how to contact 
the other, or how to find a common vocabulary through which to assure 
the other that rapprochement was not intended as a trap. 

China had the greater difficulty, partly because Beijing’s diplomacy was 
so subtle and indirect that it largely went over our heads in Washington. 
On April 1, 1969 — two months after Nixon took his oath of office — Lin 
Piao, China’s Defense Minister, who was about to be named Mao’s heir, 
in a report to the Ninth National Congress of the Communist Party 
dropped the heretofore standard designation of the United States as 
China’s principal enemy. When Lin Piao described the Soviet Union as an 
equal threat, the fundamental precondition of triangular diplomacy had 
been fulfilled. Lin Piao also reaffirmed the statement Mao had made in 
1965 to journalist Edgar Snow— that China had no troops outside its own 
frontiers and had no intention of fighting anybody unless its territory was 
attacked. 

Among the reasons Mao’s signals had been ignored was that the Chi- 
nese had vastly overrated the importance of Edgar Snow in America. 
Snow, an American journalist long sympathetic to the Chinese commu- 
nists, was thought by the leaders in Beijing to possess a special credibility 
in the United States on Chinese matters. Washington, however, thought 
of him as a communist tool and was not prepared to entrust him with its 
secrets. Mao’s gesture of placing Snow next to him on the reviewing stand 
at the Chinese Independence Day parade in October 1970 was lost on us. 
So was an interview Mao gave Snow in December 1970, during which he 
invited Nixon to visit China either as a tourist or as the American Presi- 


725 



Diplomacy 


dent. Though Mao had ordered his interpreter to turn over her notes to 
Snow (to establish his bona fides), Washington never learned of the 
invitation until the issue of Nixon’s visit had already been settled through 
other channels many months later. 

In the meantime, diplomatic contacts between the United States and 
China resumed in Warsaw in December 1969. These proved no more 
satisfactory than they had been in the past. Nixon had instructed Walter 
Stoessel, the extremely able and discreet American Ambassador in War- 
saw, to approach the Chinese charge at the first social function at which 
the two found themselves, and to invite him to resume ambassadorial 
talks. Stoessel’s opportunity came on December 3, 1969, at an odd venue 
— a Yugoslav fashion show held in the Warsaw Palace of Culture. The 
Chinese charge, entirely without instructions for the contingency of being 
approached by an American diplomat, at first ran away. Only when Stoes- 
sel finally cornered his interpreter could the message be delivered. By 
December 11, however, the charge had received instructions on how to 
deal with the Americans, and invited Stoessel to the Chinese embassy for 
a resumption of the old Warsaw talks. 

Deadlock developed almost immediately. Neither side’s standard 
agenda lent itself to an exploration of the underlying geopolitical issues, 
which, in Nixon’s view — and, as it turned out, in Mao’s and Zhou’s as 
well — would determine the future of Sino-American relations. Moreover, 
these issues were being filtered on the American side through a cumber- 
some process of consultation with the Congress and key allies, all of 
which guaranteed that progress, if there were to be any at all, would be 
tedious and subject to many vetoes. 

The result was that the Warsaw talks produced more controversies 
inside the United States government than they did in the meetings be- 
tween the parties. Nixon and I were therefore somewhat relieved when 
we learned that China was interrupting the ambassadorial talks to protest 
America’s attack on the Cambodian sanctuaries in May 1970. From then 
on, both sides were probing for a more flexible channel. The Pakistani 
government eventually filled this need. The accelerated pace of the ex- 
changes culminated in my secret trip to Beijing in July 1971. 

I could not have encountered a group of interlocutors more receptive 
to Nixon’s style of diplomacy than the Chinese leaders. Like Nixon, they 
considered the traditional agenda to be of secondary importance, and 
were above all concerned with exploring whether cooperation on the 
basis of congruent interests was possible. This was why, later on, one of 
Mao’s first remarks to Nixon was: “The small issue is Taiwan; the big issue 
is the world.” 


726 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


What the Chinese leaders wanted was reassurance that America would 
not cooperate with the Kremlin in the implementation of the Brezhnev 
Doctrine; what Nixon needed to know was whether China might cooper- 
ate with America in thwarting the Soviet geopolitical offensive. Each side’s 
goals were essentially conceptual although, sooner or later, these would 
have to be translated into practical diplomacy. A sense of common inter- 
est had to emerge from the persuasiveness of each side’s presentation 
of its view of the world — a task for which Nixon was extremely well 
suited. 

For these reasons, the early stages of the Sino-American dialogue fo- 
cused primarily on the meshing of concepts and fundamental approaches. 
Mao, Zhou, and later Deng were all extraordinary personalities. Mao was 
the visionary, ruthless, pitiless, occasionally murderous revolutionary; 
Zhou, the elegant, charming, brilliant administrator; and Deng, the re- 
former of elemental convictions. The three men reflected a common 
tradition of painstaking analysis and the distillation of the experiences of 
an ancient country with an instinct for distinguishing between the perma- 
nent and the tactical. 

Their negotiating style was as different from that of their Soviet coun- 
terparts as was possible. Soviet diplomats almost never discussed concep- 
tual issues. Their tactic was to select a problem of immediate concern to 
Moscow and to batter away at its resolution with a dogged persistence 
designed to wear down their interlocutors rather than to persuade them. 
The insistence and the vehemence with which Soviet negotiators put 
forward the Politburo consensus reflected the brutal discipline and inter- 
nal strains of Soviet politics, and transformed high policy into an ex- 
hausting retail trade. Gromyko symbolized the quintessence of this 
approach to foreign diplomacy. 

Chinese leaders represented an emotionally far more secure society. 
They were less interested in fine drafting points than in building confi- 
dence. At Nixon’s meeting with Mao, the Chinese leader wasted no time 
in assuring the President that China would not use force against Taiwan. 
“We can do without them [Taiwan] for the time being, and let it come 
after 100 years.” 27 Mao asked for no reciprocity for the assurance America 
had been seeking for twenty years. 

While drafting the Shanghai Communique with Zhou Enlai, I at one 
point offered to trade an offensive phrase in the Chinese draft for some- 
thing in the American version to which Zhou might object. “We will never 
get anywhere this way,” he replied. “If you can convince me why our 
phrase is offensive, I will give it to you.” 

Zhou’s attitude was not the product of abstract goodwill but of a sure 

727 



Diplomacy 


grasp of long-term priorities. At that point China needed to engender 
confidence; scoring debating points would have been against its interests. 
According to Mao, the principal security threat was the Soviet Union: “At 
the present time, the question of aggression from the United States or 
aggression from China is relatively small — You want to withdraw some 
of your troops back on your soil; ours do not go abroad.” 28 In other 
words, China did not fear the United States, not even in Indochina; it 
would not challenge vital American interests (regardless of what the 
United States might do in Vietnam), and was concerned primarily with 
threats from the Soviet Union (and, as it later transpired, from Japan). To 
underline his emphasis on the global equilibrium, Mao dismissed his 
own anti-imperialist pronouncements as “empty cannons.” 

The conceptual nature of the approach eased our early encounters. In 
February 1972, Nixon signed the Shanghai Communique, which was to 
provide a road map for Sino-American relations for the next decade. The 
Communique had an unprecedented feature: more than half of it was 
devoted to stating the conflicting views of the two sides on ideology, 
international affairs, Vietnam, and Taiwan. In a curious way, the catalogue 
of disagreements conferred greater significance on those subjects on 
which the two sides agreed. These affirmed that: 

— progress toward the normalization of relations between China and 
the United States is in the interests of all countries; 

— both wish to reduce the danger of international military conflict; 

— neither should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region, and each is 
opposed to efforts by any other country or group of countries to 
establish such hegemony; and 

— neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or to 
enter into agreements or understandings with the other directed at 
other states. 29 

Stripped of diplomatic jargon, these agreements meant, at a minimum, 
that China would do nothing to exacerbate the situation in Indochina or 
Korea, that neither China nor the United States would cooperate with the 
Soviet bloc, and that both would oppose any attempt by any country to 
achieve domination of Asia. Since the Soviet Union was the only country 
capable of dominating Asia, a tacit alliance to block Soviet expansionism 
in Asia was coming into being (not unlike the Entente Cordiale between 
Great Britain and France in 1904, and between Great Britain and Russia 
in 1907). 

Within a year, that understanding between the United States and China 
was made both more explicit and more global: in a communique pub- 


728 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


lished in February 1973 , China and the United States agreed to resist 
(upgraded from “oppose” in the Shanghai Communique) jointly (up- 
graded from what had been a “separate commitment”) any country’s 
attempt at world (upgraded from “Asian”) domination. In the space of 
barely a year and a half, Sino-American relations had moved from strident 
hostility and isolation to de facto alliance against the pre-eminent threat. 

The Shanghai Communique and the diplomacy leading up to it enabled 
the Nixon Administration to put in place what it called, perhaps somewhat 
grandiloquently, a new structure of peace. As soon as America’s opening 
to China was announced, the pattern of international relations changed 
dramatically. Later on, relations with China were referred to in the West 
as the China “card,” as if the policy of the tough leaders who ruled from 
the Forbidden City could be designed in Washington. In fact, the China 
“card” either played itself or it did not exist. The role of American policy 
was to establish a framework that reflected each nation’s willingness to 
support the other where national interests coincided. 

In the analysis of Nixon and his advisers, so long as China had more to 
fear from the Soviet Union than it did from the United States, China s self- 
interest would impel it to cooperate with the United States. By the same 
token, China did not pursue its opposition to Soviet expansionism as a 
favor to the United States, even though it served both American and 
Chinese purposes. Impressed as Nixon was by the clarity of thought 
of the Chinese leaders — especially of Premier Zhou Enlai — he had no 
conceivable interest in placing the United States unambiguously on either 
side of the conflict between China and the Soviet Union. America’s bar- 
gaining position would be strongest when America was closer to both 
communist giants than either was to the other. 

America’s opening to China offers a good case study of the role of 
personalities in the conduct of foreign policy. What posterity comes to 
view as a new departure usually results from a series of more or less 
random acts which make it difficult to distinguish what had been a con- 
scious choice from sheer momentum. Because Sino-American relations 
came into being after twenty years of near-total isolation, everything was 
entirely new and therefore significant in terms of what happened later. 
For both sides, necessity dictated that rapprochement occur, and the 
attempt would have had to be made no matter who governed in either 
country. But the smoothness and the speed with which it developed 
and the scope it assumed owed a great deal to the subtlety and single- 
mindedness of the leaders on both sides who brought it about and, on 
the American side in particular, to the unprecedented emphasis on the 
analysis of the national interest. 

Mao, the dedicated communist, exuded the self-assurance of knowing 


729 



Diplomacy 


that he was heir to a tradition of uninterrupted self-rule which had 
spanned three millennia. After submitting his vast country to the ideologi- 
cal binge and appalling bloodletting of the Cultural Revolution, Mao was 
just then in the process of infusing Chinese foreign policy with a certain 
practicality. For centuries, the Middle Kingdom had assured its security 
by playing off distant barbarians against immediate neighbors. Deeply 
worried about Soviet expansionism, Mao adopted the same strategy in his 
opening to the United States. 

Nixon was not concerned with Mao’s motives. His primary aim was to 
regain the American initiative in foreign policy. In seeking out what he 
termed an era of negotiations between the Soviet Union and the United 
States to overcome the trauma of Vietnam, Nixon relied neither on per- 
sonal relations nor on the conversion of the Soviets but on a balancing of 
incentives as a way of making the Kremlin more malleable. 

After America’s opening to China, the Soviet Union faced challenges on 
two fronts — NATO in the West, and China in the East. In a period that 
was, in other respects, a high point of Soviet self-confidence and a low 
point of America’s, the Nixon Administration managed to reshuffle the 
deck. It continued to see to it that general war proved too risky for the 
Soviets. After the opening to China, Soviet pressures below the level of 
general war became too risky as well, because they had the potential of 
accelerating the dreaded Sino-American rapprochement. Once America 
had opened to China, the Soviet Union’s best option became seeking its 
own relaxation of tensions with the United States. On the theory that it 
might have more to offer to the United States than China, the Kremlin 
even imagined that it could succeed in maneuvering America into a quasi- 
alliance against China, which Brezhnev clumsily proposed to Nixon in 
both 1973 and 1974. 30 

In its new approach to foreign policy, America was not about to back 
the stronger against the weaker in any balance-of-power situation. As the 
country with the greatest physical capacity to disturb the peace, the Soviet 
Union would be given an incentive to moderate existing crises and to 
avoid stirring up new ones while faced with resistance on two fronts. And 
China, which had its own capacity to upset the Asian equilibrium, would 
be restrained by the need for American goodwill in setting limits to Soviet 
adventurism. Through all of this, the Nixon Administration would try to 
solve practical issues with the Soviet Union while maintaining a dialogue 
on global concepts with the Chinese. 

Though most Soviet experts had warned Nixon that improved relations 
with China would sour Soviet-American relations, the opposite occurred. 
Prior to my secret trip to China, Moscow had been stalling for over a year 


730 



Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon's Triangular Diplomacy 


on arrangements for a summit between Brezhnev and Nixon. By a sort of 
reverse linkage, it tried to make the high-level meeting dependent on a 
whole list of conditions. Then, within a month of my visit to Beijing, the 
Kremlin reversed itself and invited Nixon to Moscow. All Soviet-American 
negotiations began to accelerate once Soviet leaders had abandoned their 
attempts to extract unilateral American concessions. 

Nixon was the first president since Theodore Roosevelt to conduct 
American foreign policy largely in the name of the national interest. The 
drawback of this approach was its dearth of emotional resonance among 
the American people. Though Nixon frequently spoke of a structure of 
peace, structures are instruments that do not of themselves evoke com- 
mitments in the hearts and minds of a society — especially one imbued 
with America’s tradition of exceptionalism. Nor is the national interest 
quite so self-evident as the various presidential reports on foreign policy 
implied. In the absence of a well-established tradition, American leader- 
ship groups are not as comfortable with the concept of national interest 
as those of, say, Great Britain, France, or China. Even under the most 
optimal and tranquil circumstances, it would have taken the better part 
of a presidential term to establish a tradition of foreign policy based on 
Nixon’s approach. 

In his first term, Nixon had little opportunity for such an educational 
task because his society was rent by protest and the conviction that the 
United States government had become preoccupied with the threat of 
communism. From the very beginning, Nixon’s second term was blighted 
by Watergate. A president facing impeachment was not likely to be ac- 
cepted as the leader of an effort to reshape traditional thinking. 

It was also the case that Nixon and his associates had put forward 
their approach in a manner that was too jarring to America’s ideological 
traditions. Twenty years earlier, John Foster Dulles had clothed his realis- 
tic analyses in the rhetoric of exceptionalism; ten years later, Ronald 
Reagan would move the American public in support of a foreign policy 
which, in its operational details, did not significantly differ from Nixon’s, 
by giving it an idealistic cast. Governing as he did during the Vietnam era, 
Nixon’s dilemma was that the Dulles — or Reagan — style of rhetoric 
would have been like pouring oil on the fire. Then too, even in more 
tranquil times, Nixon was probably too cerebral to have adopted Dulles’ 
or Reagan’s style of rhetoric. 

As the achievements of Nixon’s foreign policy approach came to be 
taken for granted and the perils it had avoided receded, Nixon’s (and my) 
approach turned increasingly controversial. Without Watergate, Nixon 
might have been able to rally the country to his style of diplomacy and 


731 



Diplomacy 


show that it was, in fact, the most realistic means of vindicating American 
idealism. But the combination of Vietnam and Watergate prevented the 
emergence of a new consensus. Even though Nixon had managed, despite 
the tragedy of Indochina, to maneuver his country into a dominant inter- 
national position, his second term witnessed an extraordinarily intense 
debate about his nation’s role in the world, and especially about its atti- 
tude toward communism. 


732 



CHAP 



TER TWENTY-NINE 

Detente 
Its Discontents 


By extricating the United States from the demoralizing bloodletting of 
Vietnam and refocusing the nation’s attention on broader international 
questions, the Nixon Administration sought to forge what it called some- 
what grandiloquently a “structure of peace.” The triangular relationship 
among the United States, the U.S.S.R., and China unlocked the door to a 
series of major breakthroughs: the end of the Vietnam War; an agreement 
that guaranteed access to divided Berlin; a dramatic reduction of Soviet 
influence in the Middle East, and the beginning of the Arab-Israeli peace 
process; and the European Security Conference (completed during the 
Ford Administration). Each of these events contributed to the others. 
Linkage was operating with a vengeance. 

Detente introduced a new fluidity to European diplomacy, a theatre 
that had been virtually petrified since the final consolidation of the East- 


733 



Diplomacy 


West spheres of influence in 1961. Until Willy Brandt was elected Chancel- 
lor in September 1969, successive West German governments had in- 
sisted that the sole legitimate German government resided in Bonn. The 
Federal Republic refused to recognize the East German regime and broke 
diplomatic relations with any government (other than Russia) that did 
grant recognition — the so-called Hallstein Doctrine. 

After the Berlin Wall was built in 1961, the issue of German unification 
gradually disappeared from the agenda of East-West negotiations and the 
German quest for unity was temporarily put on ice. During these years, 
de Gaulle explored the possibility of negotiating with Moscow indepen- 
dently of the United States by proclaiming a policy of “detente, entente, 
and cooperation” with Eastern Europe. His hope was that, if Moscow 
perceived Europe as a free agent rather than as an American satellite, the 
Kremlin leaders, given their problems with China, might be induced to 
relax their hold on Eastern Europe. De Gaulle wanted West Germany to 
separate itself to some extent from Washington and to follow France’s 
lead in its demarche to the Soviets. 

De Gaulle had made the right analysis but overestimated France’s 
capacity to exploit the more fluid international situation. The Federal 
Republic was not inclined to turn its back on a powerful America. Never- 
theless, de Gaulle’s concept was not lost on some German leaders, who 
came to believe that the Federal Republic might possess the bargaining 
chips which Paris lacked. Brandt, who served as the German Foreign 
Minister while the General was playing out his gambit, understood the 
implications of de Gaulle’s vision. Those Germans who supported de 
Gaulle’s initiative, he recalled, 

failed to grasp that the General would not pursue their dreams of a 
European nuclear deterrent (he firmly rejected German participation). 
They also overlooked the fact that he was engaged in devising a policy 
of detente which could never have been supported by the Union’s [the 
German conservative party’s] right wing and was really, in many re- 
spects, paving the way for our subsequent Ostpolitik. ' 

The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 put an end to de Gaulle’s 
initiative but, ironically, opened the door for Brandt when his turn as 
West German leader came in 1969. 

Brandt put forward the then startling thesis that, since reliance on 
the West had produced stalemate, unification should be sought through 
German rapprochement with the communist world. He urged his country 
to recognize the East German satellite, to accept the border with Poland 


734 



Detente and Its Discontents 


(the Oder-Neisse Line), and to improve relations with the Soviet Union. 
With East-West relations eased, the Soviet Union might prove less rigid 
on the issue of unification. At the least, the condition of the East German 
population might be ameliorated. 

Initially, the Nixon Administration had grave reservations about what 
Brandt called Ostpolitik. With each German state seeking to seduce the 
other, they might finally come together on some nationalist, neutralist 
program, as Adenauer and de Gaulle had feared. The Federal Republic 
had the more attractive political and social system; the communists had 
the advantage that recognition of their state, once granted, was irrevers- 
ible, and that it held the key to unification. Above all, the Nixon Adminis- 
tration feared for the unity of the West. De Gaulle had already broken the 
West’s united front toward Moscow by pulling France out of NATO and 
by pursuing his own policy of detente with the Kremlin. Washington 
viewed the specter of West Germany breaking out on its own with trepi- 
dation. 

Yet the more Brandt’s initiative gained momentum, the more Nixon 
and his associates came to realize that, whatever the pitfalls of Ostpolitik, 
the alternative was riskier still. It had already become increasingly clear 
that the Hallstein Doctrine was unsustainable. By the mid-1960s, Bonn 
itself had modified it with respect to the Eastern European communist 
governments on the lame argument that they were not free to make their 
own decisions. 

The problem went deeper, however. In the 1960s, it was inconceivable 
that Moscow would let its East German satellite collapse without a huge 
crisis. And any crisis that was the result of Germany’s insistence on its 
national aspirations — or could plausibly be presented that way — con- 
tained a strong potential for splitting the Western Alliance. No ally wanted 
to run the risk of war on behalf of unifying a country which had been the 
cause of their suffering in wartime. There had been no rush to the barri- 
cades when Nikita Khrushchev threatened to turn over Berlin’s access 
routes to the East German communists. Without exception, the Western 
allies had acquiesced in the building of the wall that divided Berlin and 
symbolized the partition of Germany. For years, the democracies had 
paid lip service to the idea of German unity while doing nothing to bring 
it about. That approach had come to the end of its possibilities. The 
Atlantic Alliance’s German policy was collapsing. 

Nixon and his advisers therefore came to accept Ostpolitik as necessary 
even while they believed that Brandt — unlike Adenauer — never had an 
emotional attachment to the Atlantic Alliance. There were only three 
powers capable of disrupting the postwar status quo in Europe — the two 


735 



Diplomacy 


superpowers and Germany, if it decided to subordinate everything to 
unification. In the 1960s, de Gaulle’s France had tried to undo the spheres 
of influence arrangement and it had failed. But if Germany, Europe’s most 
powerful economy and the European country with the greatest territorial 
grievance, tried to unravel the postwar order, the consequences would 
be grave indeed. When Brandt showed himself intent on making his own 
overtures to the East, the Nixon Administration concluded that the United 
States should support him rather than obstruct his efforts and run the risk 
of cutting the Federal Republic loose from the bonds of NATO and the 
restraints of the European Community. 

Moreover, support for Ostpolitik gave America the leverage needed to 
end the twenty-year-old crisis over Berlin. The Nixon Administration in- 
sisted on strict linkage between Ostpolitik and access to Berlin, and be- 
tween both of these issues and overall Soviet restraint. Since Ostpolitik 
was based on concrete German concessions — recognition of the Oder- 
Neisse Line and of the East German regime in return for such intangibles 
as improved relations — Brandt would never obtain parliamentary ap- 
proval unless concrete new guarantees for access to Berlin and its free- 
dom were linked with it. Otherwise, Berlin would fall prey to communist 
harassment 110 miles inside the territory of an East German satellite, 
the sovereignty of which would now be recognized by the international 
community — exactly the situation which Stalin and Khrushchev had tried 
to bring about by blockades and ultimatums. At the same time, Bonn did 
not have enough leverage to pursue the Berlin issue by itself. Only 
America was sufficiently powerful to resist the potential pressures inher- 
ent in Berlin’s isolation and with enough diplomatic leverage to bring 
about a change in access procedures. 

Berlin’s legal status as an enclave deep inside Soviet-controlled terri- 
tory was grounded on the legal fiction that it was technically “occupied” 
by the four victors of World War II. Negotiations on Berlin therefore had, 
of necessity, to be conducted by the United States, France, Great Britain, 
and the Soviet Union. In due course, both the Soviet leadership and 
Brandt (through his extremely skillful confidant, Egon Bahr) approached 
Washington for help in breaking the deadlock. In an intricate negotiation, 
a new four-power agreement was reached in the summer of 1971 guaran- 
teeing the freedom of West Berlin and Western access to the city. Hence- 
forth, Berlin disappeared from the list of international crisis spots. The 
next time it appeared on the global agenda was when the wall came 
down and the German Democratic Republic collapsed. 

In addition to the agreement on Berlin, Brandt’s Ostpolitik produced 
friendship treaties between West Germany and Poland, West and East 
Germany, and West Germany and the Soviet Union. That the Soviets 


736 



Detente and Its Discontents 


should place such emphasis on West Germany’s recognition of the bor- 
ders established by Stalin in fact indicated weakness and insecurity. The 
Federal Republic, a rump state, was on the face of it in no position to 
challenge a nuclear superpower. At the same time, these treaties gave the 
Soviets a big incentive for restrained conduct at least while they were 
being negotiated and ratified. While the treaties were before the West 
German parliament, the Soviets were reluctant to do anything that could 
jeopardize their approval; afterward, they were careful not to drive Ger- 
many back toward the Adenauer policy. Thus, when Nixon decided to 
mine North Vietnamese harbors and to resume the bombing of Hanoi, 
Moscow’s response was muted. As long as Nixon was domestically in a 
strong position, detente successfully linked the whole range of issues 
between East and West all around the world. If the Soviets were to reap 
the benefits of the relaxation of tensions, they, too, were obliged to 
contribute to detente. 

Whereas in Central Europe the Nixon Administration could relate sev- 
eral negotiations to each other, in the Middle East it used the detente 
policy as a safety net while it reduced the Soviet Union’s political influ- 
ence. During the 1960s, the Soviet Union had become the principal arms 
supplier to Syria and Egypt, and an organizational and technical supporter 
of radical Arab groups. In international forums, the Soviet Union acted as 
a spokesman for the Arab position and quite often for its most radical 
point of view. 

So long as that pattern continued, diplomatic progress would be as- 
cribed to Soviet support, while stalemate incurred the risk of repeated 
crises. The deadlock could only be broken if all the parties were obliged 
to face the fundamental geopolitical reality of the Middle East: that Israel 
was too strong (or could be made too strong) to be defeated even by all 
of its neighbors combined, and that the United States would hold the ring 
against Soviet intervention. The Nixon Administration therefore insisted 
that all the parties and not just America’s allies indicate their willingness 
to make sacrifices before America engaged itself in the peace process. 
The Soviet Union had a high capacity for raising the level of tensions, but 
it had no means of bringing crises to a conclusion or of advancing its 
friends’ causes diplomatically. It could threaten to intervene, as it had in 
1956, but experience had amply demonstrated the Soviet tendency to 
recoil in the face of American opposition. 

The key to Middle East peace, therefore, resided in Washington, not in 
Moscow. If the United States played its cards carefully, either the Soviet 
Union would be obliged to contribute to a genuine solution or one of its 
Arab clients would break ranks and begin moving toward the United 
States. In either case, Soviet influence among the radical Arab states 


737 



Diplomacy 


would be reduced. This was why, early in Nixon’s first term, I felt confi- 
dent enough to tell a journalist that the new administration would seek 
to expel Soviet influence from the Middle East. Though that incautious 
remark created a furor, it accurately described the strategy the Nixon 
Administration was about to implement. 

Not understanding their strategic dilemma, the Soviet leaders tried 
to lure Washington into supporting diplomatic outcomes that would 
strengthen the Soviet position in the Arab world. But as long as the Soviet 
Union kept supplying the radical Middle Eastern states with the bulk of 
their arms and their diplomatic programs were identical, the United 
States had no interest in cooperating with Moscow — though this was not 
always clear to those who considered cooperation with the Soviet Union 
an end in itself. In the view of Nixon and his advisers, the best strategy 
was to demonstrate that the Soviet Union’s capacity to foment crises was 
not matched by its ability to resolve them. Arab moderation would be 
encouraged by rewarding responsible Arab leaders with American 
support when their grievances were legitimate. The Soviet Union would 
then either participate or be moved to the fringes of Middle East diplo- 
macy. 

In pursuit of this goal, the United States adopted two complementary 
policies: it blocked every Arab move that resulted from Soviet military 
support or involved a Soviet military threat; and it took charge of the 
peace process once frustration with the stalemate had brought some key 
Arab leaders to dissociate from the Soviet Union and turn to the United 
States. These conditions came about after the 1973 Middle East War. 

Until then, the United States had had to traverse a rocky road. In 1969, 
Secretary Rogers presented a plan, subsequently named after him, which 
endorsed Israel’s 1967 borders with “minor” rectifications in return for a 
comprehensive peace agreement. It suffered the usual fate of initiatives 
undertaken before the underlying reality had changed: Israel turned it 
down, refusing to accept the delineation of borders; the Arab countries 
rejected it because they were not ready to undertake a commitment to 
peace (however vague such an undertaking would turn out to be). 

Serious military confrontations occurred in 1970. The first was along 
the Suez Canal, when Egypt started the so-called war of attrition against 
Israel. Israel retaliated with major air strikes deep inside Egypt, and the 
Soviet Union responded by installing a major air-defense system in Egypt, 
manned by some 15,000 Soviet military personnel. 

The dangers were not confined to Egypt. Later that same year, the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), which had established almost a 
state within a state in Jordan, hijacked four aircraft and flew them to 


738 



Detente and Its Discontents 


Jordan. King Hussein thereupon ordered his army to attack the PLO and 
expelled its leaders from the country; Syria invaded Jordan; Israel mobi- 
lized. The Middle East seemed on the edge of war. The United States 
massively reinforced its naval forces in the Mediterranean and made clear 
that it would not tolerate any outside intervention. It soon became appar- 
ent that the Soviet Union would run no risk of confrontation with the 
United States. Syria withdrew and the crisis ended, though not without 
having first demonstrated to the Arab world which superpower was more 
relevant to shaping the future of the area. 

The first sign that the Nixon strategy was having an impact came in 
1972. Egyptian President Anwar Sadat dismissed all his Soviet military 
advisers and asked Soviet technicians to leave the country. At the same 
time, secret diplomatic contacts between Sadat and the White House 
began, though they were constrained, first by the American presidential 
election and then by Watergate. 

In 1973, Egypt and Syria went to war against Israel. Both Israel and the 
United States were taken completely by surprise, demonstrating how 
preconceptions often shape intelligence assessments. 2 The American as- 
sessment was so dominated by the belief in vast Israeli superiority that all 
Arab warnings had been dismissed as bluff. There was no evidence that 
the Soviet Union actively encouraged Egypt and Syria to go to war, and 
Sadat told us later that Soviet leaders were pressing for a cease-fire from 
the beginning. Nor was the Soviet resupply of its Arab friends remotely 
comparable in scope and impact to America’s airlift to Israel. 

When the war ended, the Arab armies had fought more effectively than 
in any previous conflict. But Israel had crossed the Suez Canal to a point 
some twenty miles from Cairo and occupied Syrian territory to the very 
outskirts of Damascus. American support would be needed, first to re- 
store the status quo ante and then to make progress toward peace. 

The first Arab leader to recognize this was Sadat, who abandoned his 
previous all-or-nothing approach and turned from Moscow to Washington 
for assistance in a step-by-step process toward peace. Even Syrian Presi- 
dent Hafez Asad, considered the more radical of the two leaders and the 
one more closely tied to the Soviet Union, appealed to American diplo- 
macy about the Golan Heights. In 1974, there were interim agreements 
with Egypt and Syria which began a process of Israeli withdrawal in 
return for Arab security guarantees. In 1975, Israel and Egypt concluded 
a second disengagement agreement. In 1979, Egypt and Israel signed a 
formal peace agreement under the aegis of President Carter. Every Ameri- 
can administration since then has made a major contribution to a peace 
process, including the first direct negotiations between Arabs and Israelis 


739 



Diplomacy 


organized by Secretary of State James Baker in 1991, and an Israeli- Pales- 
tinian agreement under the aegis of Clinton in September 1993. The 
Kremlin played no significant role in any of these initiatives. 

These pages cannot deal with the details of Middle East diplomacy, 
being principally concerned with how the United States used its relation- 
ship with Moscow to reduce Soviet influence in the Middle East without 
producing a major crisis. In the debates of the 1970s, Nixon’s critics made 
much fun of his alleged desire to enmesh the Soviet Union in agreements 
for their own sake to achieve an illusory reduction of tensions. Yet 
Nixon’s Middle East diplomacy was a good illustration of how Nixon and 
his advisers perceived the structure of peace, which the President so 
frequently invoked. It was not a starry-eyed quest for cooperation for 
its own sake but a method for conducting the geopolitical competition. 
American strategy was based on the proposition that the Soviet Union 
should be faced with the choice of either separating itself from its radical 
Arab clients or accepting a reduction of its influence. In the end, this 
strategy curtailed Soviet influence and placed the United States into the 
pivotal position in Middle East diplomacy. 

The Nixon Administration pursued two courses to achieve this goal. 
During the Middle East War, it kept open an almost daily channel of 
communication with the Kremlin to avoid permitting decisions to be 
taken in the heat of the moment or on the basis of inadequate informa- 
tion. This could not prevent all the tensions inherent in clashing interests, 
but it reduced the danger of a crisis of misunderstanding. Simultaneously 
we conducted negotiations on a wide range of issues in order to give the 
Soviet leaders a stake they would be reluctant to jeopardize. The Berlin 
negotiations contributed to Soviet restraint in the Middle East until well 
into 1973. Afterward, the European Security Conference helped to moder- 
ate the Soviet reaction during the various diplomatic shuttles that moved 
the Soviet Union to the fringes of Mideast diplomacy. A delicate balance 
was needed between defining significant criteria for progress and making 
agreements ends in themselves, thereby incurring dependence on Soviet 
goodwill. Detente not only calmed the international situation, it created 
inhibitions which caused Soviet leaders to accept what amounted to a 
major geopolitical retreat. 

Despite these successes, the Nixon Administration faced mounting con- 
troversy on the subject of its foreign policy. Any shift in foreign policy 
encounters resistance from adherents to the previous course; every suc- 
cessful negotiation must run the gauntlet of those who deny that an 
agreement generally reflects reciprocal concessions rather than unilateral 
satisfactions. Linkage ran counter to the legalistic traditions of the Ameri- 


740 



Detente and Its Discontents 


can foreign policy establishment. The opening to China offended the 
China lobby. The combination of adversarial and cooperative conduct 
implicit in detente with the Soviet Union grated on the traditional black- 
and-white assumption that every country was either friendly or hostile 
and not, as in the real world, a combination of both. 

These disagreements were quite similar to what Wilson had faced in 
1915-19, when he moved his isolationist country toward a world role; to 
what Roosevelt had encountered in 1939-41, when he committed 
America to the side of Great Britain; and to what Truman had had to 
contend with in 1946-49, when he developed the architecture of the 
Cold War. 

The key difference was that these debates were now occurring in the 
midst of turmoil in Vietnam, followed immediately by Watergate. In the 
American system, the president is the only nationally elected figure; he is 
also the sole focus for defining national purposes. Other institutions can 
make pronouncements on foreign policy, but only the president is in a 
position to implement policy over an extended period of time. The Con- 
gress, as a legislative body, tends to segment issues into a series of individ- 
ual decisions, which it then seeks to resolve through reciprocal 
compromises. The media can recommend a course, but they are in no 
position to deal with the nuances of day-to-day execution. But the essence 
of foreign policy is precisely the ability to accumulate nuances in pursuit 
of long-range goals. Thus, it falls to the president to chart the course. And 
although the other institutions are in a position to modify or even to 
thwart it, they are unable to bring about a coherent alternative. 

All great departures in American foreign policy have resulted from 
strong presidents interacting with America’s other institutions. The presi- 
dent serves as the educator whose moral vision provides the framework 
for the debate. But for Watergate, Nixon might have been able to translate 
the very tangible foreign policy successes of his first term into permanent 
operating principles — in the way Franklin Delano Roosevelt had created 
and then consolidated a new approach to American domestic policy, and 
Truman and Acheson had charted the course for the containment policy. 

But Nixon’s capacity to lead collapsed as the result of Watergate. This 
is not the occasion to delve into that tragedy: for present purposes, it is 
sufficient to stress that Watergate deprived Nixon of the moral authority 
essential for the educational task his policy required. On day-to-day mat- 
ters he continued to the end to act decisively and with acumen. But on 
long-range or conceptual controversies, he remained capable of raising 
fundamental issues but was no longer sufficiently strong enough to shape 
their solutions. In the absence of the balance wheel of a strong president 


741 



Diplomacy 


acting as moderator and integrator, each contending group could push 
its particular point of view to an extreme. A great part of the 1970s thus 
turned into an elaboration of the conflict over themes which had been 
part and parcel of previous great American initiatives — lacking, however, 
the synthesis which, in other formative periods, has conferred the neces- 
sary impetus on America’s new departures. 

Nixon’s new approach to foreign policy challenged American excep- 
tionalism and its imperative that policy be based on the affirmation of 
transcendent values. America’s challenge, as Nixon and his advisers saw 
it, was to adapt these traditional verities to the new international environ- 
ment. America’s domestic experience had led it to interpret the interna- 
tional order as being essentially benign, and its diplomacy as an 
expression of goodwill and a willingness to compromise. In that scheme 
of things, hostility was seen as an aberration. Nixon’s foreign policy, on 
the other hand, perceived the world as composed of ambiguous chal- 
lenges, of nations impelled by interest rather than goodwill, and of incre- 
mental rather than final changes — a world, in short, that could be 
managed but could be neither dominated nor rejected. In such a world, 
no clear-cut terminal point beckoned, and the solution to one problem 
was more likely to turn into an admission ticket to the next one. 

Such a world required a foreign policy geared to staying power as 
much as to salvation. Traditional American values remained as important 
as ever, but, unlike during Wilson’s era, they could no longer be trans- 
lated into an agenda of immediate, final outcomes. Instead, they would 
be needed to provide the inner strength for America to move through 
ambiguity to a world that was, everyone hoped, better than the one 
before, but never finally finished. 

Nixon and his advisers saw no contradiction in treating the communist 
world as both adversary and collaborator: adversary in fundamental ideol- 
ogy and in the need to prevent communism from upsetting the global 
equilibrium; collaborator in keeping the ideological conflict from explod- 
ing into a nuclear war. Yet, having traversed the full emotional distance 
of America’s disillusionment in Vietnam, many Americans began to look 
for reassurance through the reaffirmation of a moral commitment rather 
than a calculation of interest. 

In the absence of a morally persuasive presidency, many of those 
reared on the traditional approach to American foreign policy — in both 
the liberal and the conservative camps — joined forces in opposing 
Nixon’s new approach. Liberals did so because they considered the new 
emphasis on national interest amoral, conservatives because they were 
more committed to the ideological competition with Moscow than to the 
geopolitical one. 


742 



Detente and Its Discontents 


Because American thinking on foreign policy had been shaped by lib- 
eral ideas ever since Woodrow Wilson, there was no ready constituency 
for Nixon’s style of diplomacy. Nixon did not embrace the pragmatic 
case-by-case approach preferred by the foreign policy specialists and the 
lawyers who shaped so much of liberal America’s views on international 
relations. Nor did he endorse the Wilsonian concepts of collective secu- 
rity, judicial settlement of disputes, and emphasis on disarmament as the 
only, or even the principal, road to international order. As a result, liber- 
als found themselves in an uncomfortable quandary: diplomatic results 
of which they approved in substance, such as the relaxation of tensions 
with the Soviet Union and the opening to China, were emerging from 
principles that were anathema to the Wilsonian tradition, such as em- 
phasis on the national interest and the balance of power. Even when 
the Nixon Administration was successfully promoting policies which 
stemmed from Wilsonian ideals, such as increasing emigration from the 
Soviet Union, its tendency to pursue these goals through secret diplomacy 
compounded its estrangement from the representatives of the historic 
rhythm of American foreign policy. 

To conservatives, Nixon’s strategy of treating the Soviet Union as a 
geopolitical phenomenon was unfamiliar and uncongenial. The vast ma- 
jority of them viewed the conflict with communism as being almost exclu- 
sively ideological. Convinced of America’s imperviousness to geopolitical 
challenges, they treated issues at the front lines of containment as being 
of marginal concern and as too close for comfort to the traditional strug- 
gles of the European powers, which, on the whole, they held in low 
esteem. They had given up on Vietnam already during the Johnson Ad- 
ministration, seeing it as a diversion from the primary struggle — not, as 
Nixon did, as a crucial component of it. Being moral absolutists, they 
distrusted any negotiation with the Soviet Union, viewing compromise as 
retreat. The conservative wing of the Republican Party was prepared to 
swallow the opening to China through clenched teeth, as a contribution 
to the discomfiture of Moscow and as a tactical necessity for extricating 
America from Vietnam. But, having always been dubious about negotiat- 
ing with Moscow and most at ease with the original Acheson-Dulles ap- 
proach of waiting for the collapse of communism behind positions of 
strength, conservatives treated a wide-ranging negotiation on political and 
military issues as abandonment of the moral issue. 

Traditional conservatives were gradually joined by recruits from an 
unexpected quarter — by liberal, strongly anticommunist Democrats who 
had been alienated from their party by the ascendancy of its radical wing. 
The McGovern candidacy in 1972 had completed the disillusionment of 
these self-styled neoconservatives, and the 1973 Middle East War gave 


743 



Diplomacy 


them the first opportunity to state their foreign policy views coherently 
and on a national scale. 

Dedicated anticommunists, the neoconservatives might have been ex- 
pected to turn into moral supporters of an administration which had 
persisted in Vietnam in largest part to maintain America’s claim to be 
manning the anticommunist ramparts. Like the conservatives, however, 
the neoconservatives were more concerned with ideology than with geo- 
politics. Several of their most influential figures had passionately opposed 
the Vietnam War. And they brought all their former reservations about 
Nixon into the new camp, giving him no credit for enduring the bitter 
struggle for an honorable peace. Because they neither liked nor trusted 
Nixon, they feared that he might abandon vital interests in an attempt to 
save his presidency. 

The White House’s cavalier treatment of the established government 
bureaucracy complicated matters further. During his first term, Nixon 
had shifted much of the conduct of diplomacy into the White House, as 
he had announced he would during his presidential campaign. Once the 
Soviet leaders had grasped that Nixon would never delegate the key 
foreign policy decisions, a back-channel of direct contact developed be- 
tween Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and the White House. In this 
manner, the President and the top leadership in the Kremlin were able 
to deal directly with the most important issues. 

Hell hath no fury like a bureaucrat scorned, and the Nixon White House 
compounded the problem by the insensitivity with which it overrode 
established procedure. By definition, a negotiation is about trading con- 
cessions. Yet those who are excluded from the ebb and flow of negotia- 
tions feel free to give expression to the fantasy of a negotiation in which 
all the concessions are made by the other side, and in which the American 
concessions could have been avoided had their advice been solicited. 
Deprived of the usual bureaucratic safety net and assailed by uneasy 
conservatives, frustrated liberals, and aggressive neoconservatives, the 
Nixon White House found itself in the strange position of being on the 
defensive with respect to a successful foreign policy. 

In effect, the critics were urging the Administration to adopt a confron- 
tational course at a time when America was reeling under the assaults of 
the Peace Movement, when the President was in the process of being 
impeached (and his successor, Gerald R. Ford, was appointed rather than 
elected), and when every Congressional session reduced the President’s 
authority to threaten force and at the same time sought to cut the defense 
budget. The task at hand, as the Nixon Administration saw it, was to get 
beyond Vietnam without suffering geopolitical losses, and to establish a 


744 



Detente and Its Discontents 


policy toward the communists that was geared to the relevant battlefields. 
Nixon saw detente as a tactic in a long-term geopolitical struggle; his 
liberal critics treated it as an end in itself while conservatives and neocon- 
servatives rejected the geopolitical approach as so much historical pessi- 
mism, preferring a policy of unremitting ideological confrontation. 

Ironically, by 1973, Nixon’s policy had so tranquilized East-West rela- 
tions that it became safe to challenge it at home. At the heart of the 
controversy was the deeper issue of whether it was either possible or 
desirable to wean American policy away from its faith in final outcomes 
and episodic involvements. Nixon argued that, in a multipolar world, 
change had to be sought through evolution. This required patience — not 
the traditional long suit of American diplomacy. Nixon’s critics, reflecting 
the tradition of American exceptionalism, insisted that America commit 
itself to the goal of immediately reshaping Soviet society — a goal which 
had never been sought, not even during America’s atomic monopoly. A 
major national debate was both inevitable and necessary between the 
proponents of foreign policy as strategy and of foreign policy as crusade; 
between those who believed that the wisest course was to discipline a 
rival superpower and those who insisted on chastising evil. What was 
not inevitable was the collapse of the presidency, which prevented a 
meaningful resolution of the debate. 

In the absence of some overriding set of principles, each side in the 
controversy focused on different threats. Nixon’s nightmare was geopolit- 
ical vulnerability to creeping Soviet expansionism. The conservatives’ fear 
was moral disarmament or an apocalyptic nuclear showdown made possi- 
ble by some Soviet technological breakthrough. The liberals’ concern 
was American overemphasis on military security. The conservatives 
feared Soviet military dominance. The liberals wanted to avoid overexten- 
sion. Nixon sought a sustainable long-term strategy. 

The result was a maelstrom of conflicting and irresolvable pressures. 
Liberals watched closely for any sign of flagging commitment to arms 
control. Nixon vigilantly resisted geopolitical threats, from Cuba to the 
Middle East. Conservatives attacked what they perceived to be America’s 
retreat from ideological confrontation and nuclear strategy. This led to 
the bizarre situation in which liberals were attacking the Nixon defense 
program for being too high, and conservatives were criticizing Nixon’s 
arms control policy for being too conciliatory. The defense programs 
were put through the Congress by Nixon with conservative help over 
liberal opposition, and arms control measures were approved — where 
Congressional approval was needed — with liberal help against some con- 
servative opposition. 


745 



Diplomacy 


The gravamen of most of these criticisms (in the end, even of the 
liberal ones) was a call to return to the original premises of containment 
and to wait behind strong defenses for the transformation of the Soviet 
system. Nixon agreed with the need for strong defenses, but he did not 
believe in a policy that would enable Moscow to shape the agenda of 
diplomacy and drive the American domestic crisis out of control. The 
critics thought that an active East- West diplomacy would dull the vigilance 
of the American people. Nixon believed that diplomatic flexibility was 
needed to buttress America’s willingness to resist communism. He was 
determined to resist every Soviet expansionist move — which, in turn, 
some critics interpreted as injecting European-style geopolitics into what 
was primarily an ideological conflict. 

In June 1974, Senator Henry Jackson circulated to his Subcommittee 
on Arms Control a critique of detente prepared by a group of eminent 
scholars that maintained: 

[i]n the present Soviet terminology, detente or “peaceful coexistence” 
denotes a strategic alternative to overtly militant antagonism against the 
so-called “capitalist countries.” It does not imply the abandonment by 
the Soviet Union and its allies of conflict with the liberal Western coun- 
tries Head-on conflict is to yield to indirect methods of combat, 

using non-military means, described as “ideological:” in Soviet practice 
this term covers subversion, propaganda, political blackmail and intelli- 
gence operations. 3 

George Meany, President of the AFL-CIO, expressed the same thoughts in 
layman’s language before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee: 

Here’s how the Soviet Union sees detente: Detente is based on U.S. 
weakness. Detente means intensification of ideological warfare. De- 
tente means an undermining of NATO. Detente means ultimate Soviet 
military superiority over the West. Detente means recognition by the 
West of the Soviet Union’s ownership of Eastern Europe. Detente 
means withdrawal of American forces from Europe. 4 

Such criticisms exasperated the Nixon Administration, which never had 
doubted that the Kremlin viewed detente as serving at least some Soviet 
purposes — otherwise Moscow would not have pursued it. The real issue 
was whether detente also served America’s purposes. Nixon and his advis- 
ers thought that time was on the side of the democracies because a period 
of peace without expansion would strengthen the centrifugal forces 
within communism. 


746 



Detente and Its Discontents 


I stated the analysis underlying detente in March 1976 during the Ford 
Administration, which in effect pursued the same policy as the Nixon 
Administration and incurred the same adversaries: 

Soviet strength is uneven; the weaknesses and frustrations of the Soviet 
system are glaring and have been clearly documented. Despite the 
inevitable increase in its power, the Soviet Union remains far behind 
us and our allies in any overall assessment of military, economic, and 
technological strength; it would be reckless in the extreme for the 
Soviet Union to challenge the industrial democracies. And Soviet soci- 
ety is no longer insulated from the influences and attractions of the 
outside world or impervious to the need for external contacts. 5 

Left to the passage of time, the essentially theoretical debate over detente 
might have been overtaken by events. But the intellectual leader of the 
critics, the formidable Senator Henry Jackson, was far from ready to leave 
detente to the test of time, and mobilized support to stop it in its tracks. 
A Democrat from the state of Washington and one of America’s most 
impressive public servants, Jackson was a serious student of international 
affairs, especially of the Soviet Union, and a world-class expert on de- 
fense. He combined erudition with a masterly grasp of how to manipulate 
the various branches of the government, bringing the Congress together 
with sympathetic elements in the Executive Branch. Jackson’s staff, 
headed by the subtle Richard Perle, matched his erudition and exceeded 
even his finely honed manipulative skills. 

Although he had been Nixon’s first choice for Secretary of Defense, 
Jackson was to become the most implacable opponent of the Admin- 
istration’s Soviet policy. Throughout most of Nixon’s first term, Jackson 
had stood reasonably steadfast on Vietnam, proving himself a staunch 
supporter of Nixon’s efforts to preserve the sinews of American defense 
in the face of relentless Congressional pressure to cut the budget uni- 
laterally. He had been indispensable in guiding Nixon’s proposed Anti- 
Ballistic-Missile (ABM) defense system through the Senate. Nevertheless, 
at the end of Nixon’s first term, the two parted company, even though 
their interpretations of Soviet purposes were nearly identical. Jackson did 
not agree with the ABM Treaty, which limited the number of missile 
defense sites for both sides to two, and he soon extended that opposition 
to the whole field of East-West relations. 

Nixon’s original program for missile defense (ABM) provided for a 
dozen defense sites around the perimeter of the United States. It would 
have been useful against smaller nuclear forces like China’s and against 


747 



Diplomacy 


less-than-all-out Soviet attacks, and could have provided a nucleus for an 
eventual full-scale defense against the Soviet Union. 

But the Congress reduced the number of sites every year so that the 
Pentagon by 1971 had included only two sites for the next budget. Such 
a deployment served no conceivable strategic purpose; its sole utility 
was experimental. In addition, reflecting the antimilitary mentality of the 
period, the Congressional majority had cut the proposed defense budget 
in each Congressional session (not counting programs which the Nixon 
Administration never put forward because it knew they would be de- 
feated). 

These pressures converted the Defense Department into a sudden and 
uncharacteristic advocate of arms control. In early 1970, Deputy Secretary 
of Defense David Packard urged Nixon to undertake immediately a new 
SALT initiative “with which we can attempt to achieve an agreement at 
Vienna by mid-October or, at the latest, November.” He considered a 
quick agreement essential, even if it was only partial, because the looming 
“squeeze on the national budget” was “likely” to cause “large reductions 
in defense programs, including strategic forces.” Failing this, unilateral 
Congressional decisions would progressively “decrease our bargaining 
leverage.” 6 

In this political setting, Nixon, in the summer of 1970, initiated a corre- 
spondence with Soviet Prime Minister Aleksei Kosygin which provided 
the framework for an agreement on the limitation of strategic arms (SALT) 
two years later. Until then, the Soviets had insisted that the arms control 
talks confine themselves to limiting defensive weapons in which the 
United States had a technological edge but to defer limits on offensive 
missiles, of which the Soviet Union was producing 200 annually of all 
types and the United States none. Nixon made it clear that he would 
never agree to so one-sided a bargain. The outcome of the Kosygin-Nixon 
correspondence was that the Soviets conceded that both offensive and 
defensive weapons be limited simultaneously. 

The subsequent negotiations led to two agreements. The ABM Treaty 
of 1972 confined defenses to two sites and 200 missile launchers — too 
few to contain even a small-scale attack. Nixon agreed to the ceilings in 
order to preserve a nucleus of defense and because he feared that, other- 
wise, the Congress would eliminate even the experimental program. At 
the time, the defensive limitations were relatively free of controversy. 

What drew fire was a five-year Interim Agreement which obliged both 
sides to freeze their strategic offensive-missile forces, whether land- or 
sea-based, at agreed levels. The United States had established its own 
levels five years earlier and deeming them sufficient had never had a 


748 



Detente and Its Discontents 


program to increase them. The Soviet Union was producing 200 missiles 
a year. To reach the agreed ceiling, it had to dismantle 210 older long- 
range missiles. Bombers (in which the United States had the advantage) 
were not included in the ceilings. Both sides remained free to improve 
the technology of their forces. 

It was difficult to compare the missile forces of the two sides. American 
missiles were smaller and more accurate; half of them were being 
equipped with multiple warheads (that is, each missile would carry sev- 
eral explosive devices). Soviet missiles were larger, cruder, and less flex- 
ible. They also exceeded America’s by about 300. As long as each side 
made its own decisions, the disparity seemed to bother no one, no doubt 
because America had a large advantage in aircraft and, due to multiple 
warheads, a growing edge in warheads — which would only increase over 
the five years during which the agreement would be in effect. 

Nevertheless, as soon as the SALT Agreement was signed at the May 
1972 Moscow Summit, the disparity in agreed launchers suddenly became 
controversial. It was a strange state of affairs. Before SALT negotiations 
had even been conceived, the United States had established the existing 
ceilings. The Pentagon had made no effort to increase the level through- 
out Nixon’s first term; no Pentagon request for larger strategic forces was 
received much less turned down. And even after higher and equal ceil- 
ings were agreed on in the follow-on accord at Vladivostok in 1974, the 
Defense Department never proposed increasing the number of launchers 
which had been established in 1967. 

But a visitor from Mars observing America’s domestic debate would 
have heard an amazing tale about how the United States government had 
“conceded” an inequality in missiles by agreeing to settle for its own 
unilateral program, which it had never planned to change in the absence 
of SALT, and which it never changed, even after the ceiling was removed 
two years later — not even in the Reagan Administration. A force level 
which the United States had adopted voluntarily because it provided 
America with more warheads than it did the Soviet Union, and which the 
United States was in no position to change for the duration of the 
agreement, was suddenly termed as dangerous when it was reaffirmed as 
part of that agreement. 7 

Unfortunately for Nixon and his advisers, “inequality” was one of those 
code words that create their own reality. By the time the Administration’s 
rebuttal had compared launchers and warheads and planned and negoti- 
ated ceilings, eyes had glazed over, leaving only the uncomfortable feel- 
ing that what the Administration was defending was a “missile gap” 
disadvantageous to the United States. 


749 



Diplomacy 


The Nixon Administration saw in the SALT Agreement a means of pro- 
tecting essential defense programs against Congressional assault in two 
ways: it insisted that the ceilings established by the agreement be treated 
as benchmarks by the Congress, and it coupled the agreement with a 
$4.5 billion increase in the defense budget for modernization. Even now, 
twenty years later, most key strategic programs (the B-l, the Stealth bomb- 
ers, the MX missile, the strategic cruise missiles, the Trident missile and 
submarines) originated in the Nixon and Ford Administrations during the 
period that SALT I was in effect. 

What looked like a debate regarding the missile forces of both sides 
was really a symbol of a deeper and very valid concern. Jackson and his 
supporters saw in the growing emphasis on arms control — indeed, the 
media’s and the academic community’s near-obsession with it — a poten- 
tial threat to any serious defense policy. New military programs were 
increasingly being justified on the ground that they served as bargaining 
chips in future SALT negotiations. The Jackson forces feared that such a 
trend could erode any strategic rationale for defense. After all, what was 
the sense of allocating scarce resources to costly programs whose primary 
purpose was to be offered up for dismantling? 

In this context, the debate about the provisions of the agreement was 
ultimately about how to come to grips with the end of America’s strategic 
superiority. Theoretically, it had been understood for a decade that the 
destructiveness of nuclear weapons spelled stalemate, in that it precluded 
victory at any cost which a rational political leader could accept. That 
realization had caused the Kennedy Administration to develop the strate- 
gic doctrine of “assured destruction,” which based deterrence on the 
capability of each side to devastate the other. 

Far from solving the dilemma, this strategic doctrine had merely rede- 
fined it. A national strategy relying on the threat of suicide was bound to 
come to a dead end sooner or later. And SALT I brought home to the 
public what the experts had known for at least a decade. Suddenly, SALT 
was being blamed for a state of affairs which would have existed even 
more jarringly under conditions of unrestricted armaments. The dilemma 
was real enough, but SALT had not caused it. As long as deterrence was 
equated with mutual destruction, the psychological inhibitions against 
nuclear war would be overwhelming. America was building weapons 
useful only in discouraging the adversary’s use of nuclear weapons, and 
not for their relevance to any foreseeable political crisis. Once that real- 
ization sank in, mutual assured destruction was bound to undermine 
morale and destroy existing alliances. This, and not SALT, was the real 
nuclear dilemma. 


750 



Detente and Its Discontents 


Thus, in its essence, the debate about SALT — and detente — reflected a 
rebellion against a world in which a deadly ideological conflict was being 
waged side by side an unavoidable strategic stalemate. The real clash over 
SALT invoked two very different assessments of the nuclear stalemate. 
Nixon and his advisers concluded that whichever side was capable of 
posing challenges short of nuclear war would, over time, acquire ever- 
greater blackmailing potential and be able to conduct a policy of creeping 
expansionism. This was why Nixon put his emphasis on resisting the 
geopolitical threat. In the absence of a counterforce capability — the abil- 
ity to disarm the adversary in a first strike— American strategic power 
would become less and less suitable for the defense of overseas areas, 
including, in the end, even Europe (see chapter 24). 

The groups associated with Jackson understood this and hankered after 
a restoration of America’s strategic superiority. But they clothed their 
concern in the fear not only that America was losing its first-strike capabil- 
ity — which was true— but that, over time, the Soviet Union might acquire 
such a capability— which was not true, certainly not in a time frame 
relevant to the debate. 

Jackson’s nightmare was strategic vulnerability; Nixon’s nightmare was 
geopolitical vulnerability. Jackson’s concern was the balance of military 
forces; Nixon’s principal concern was the global distribution of political 
power. 8 Jackson and his supporters tried to use SALT to force the Soviet 
Union to redesign its entire strategic force according to American prefer- 
ences. Nixon and his advisers did not believe that America had the lever- 
age for such a design in a period of Congressionally imposed reductions 
in the defense budget, though Reagan would later demonstrate the politi- 
cal utility of a determined American military buildup. Jackson and his 
supporters focused primarily on the strategic balance, the threat to which 
they treated as a largely technological problem. The Nixon Administration 
sought to prepare America for a role novel in its history but as old as the 
state system: preventing the accumulation by an adversary of seemingly 
marginal geopolitical gains which, over time, would overthrow the bal- 
ance of power. The Jackson forces were relatively tolerant of geopolitical 
changes (Jackson voted against aid to the noncommunist side in Angola 
in 1975) but were zealous about the implications of the most esoteric 
weapons technology. 

This deadlock drove the SALT debate into ever more abstruse realms 
until the controversy settled on the minutiae of weapons systems no 
layman could possibly understand, and over which the weapons experts 
themselves were deeply divided. In the perspective of a decade, the 
arguments about trade-offs between cruise missiles and Soviet Backfire 


751 



Diplomacy 


bombers, equal total aggregates and unequal multiple warheads, read 
like medieval tracts recorded by the scribes of some secluded monastery. 

The questions raised in the debate were fundamental and unavoidable. 
What caused the deadlock was the anguish of the presidency, which 
rendered a meeting of minds impossible. American idealism reigned 
supreme, unfettered by any incentives for political compromise. The Pres- 
ident could exact no penalty and offer no rewards, the perquisites inher- 
ent in his office. The critics had no political incentive to adjust their view. 
The debate took on the aura of a faculty meeting between self-willed 
professors. Historians, however, will benefit from seeing the positions 
stated more clearly than is typically the case in a political process. America 
paid for its self-flagellation with a delay of nearly a decade in finally 
confronting its geopolitical necessities. 

In the end, communism collapsed partly as a result of its own sclerosis, 
partly because of the pressures from a reinvigorated West. This is why 
the final judgment of history will undoubtedly be kinder to the opposing 
camps in America’s domestic debate than they ever were to each other. It 
will perceive the approaches of Nixon and of his conservative critics as 
having been complementary rather than competitive, with one side of the 
debate stressing the geopolitical and the other the technological aspect 
of a struggle whose moral essence both viewed in a similar fashion. 

Arms control turned out to be technically too ponderous to carry the 
weight of the philosophical controversy over the nature of American 
foreign policy. Gradually, the debate shifted to an issue more congenial 
to traditional American idealism, and one which had a greater resonance 
with the public at large — the proposition that human rights should rank 
among the principal goals of American foreign policy. 

The human rights debate started out as an appeal for wielding Ameri- 
can influence to improve the treatment of Soviet citizens but graduated 
into a strategy for forcing a Soviet domestic upheaval. As with arms con- 
trol, the issue did not concern the objective, which was not in dispute, 
but the degree to which ideological confrontation should be the top 
priority of American foreign policy. 

As a diplomatic subject, the issue of Jewish emigration from the Soviet 
Union had been the brainchild of the Nixon Administration. Prior to 1969, 
such emigration had never been on the agenda of the East-West dialogue; 
all previous administrations of both parties had treated it as falling within 
the domestic jurisdiction of the Soviet Union. None had been prepared 
to burden East-West relations, which were already sufficiently strained, 
with an additional controversy. In 1968, only 400 Jews had been permitted 
to emigrate from the Soviet Union, and no democratic country had raised 
the issue. 


752 



Detente and Its Discontents 


As American-Soviet relations improved, the Nixon Administration 
began discussing the subject in the presidential back-channel with the 
argument that Soviet actions would not pass unnoticed at the highest 
levels of the American government. The Kremlin began to respond to 
American “suggestions,” especially after Soviet-American relations started 
improving. Each year, the number of Jewish emigrants rose, and by 1973 
the annual figure reached 35,000. In addition, the White House regularly 
submitted to Soviet leaders a list of hardship cases — individuals who had 
been denied exit visas or whose families were separated, and some of 
whom were in prison. Most of these Soviet citizens were also permitted 
to emigrate. 

All of this was taking place by what students of diplomacy would de- 
scribe as “tacit bargaining.” No formal requests were made, and no formal 
responses were given. Soviet actions were noted without being acknowl- 
edged. Indeed, the emigration practices of the Soviet Union were steadily 
improving, though no claim to that effect was ever made by Washington. 
The Nixon Administration stuck to these ground rules so meticulously 
that it never claimed any credit for improving Soviet emigration practices 
— even during election campaigns — until Henry Jackson turned the issue 
of Jewish emigration into a public confrontation. 

What triggered Jackson was a curious decision by the Kremlin during 
the summer of 1972 to impose an “exit tax” on emigrants, allegedly to 
reimburse the Soviet state for the expense of having educated its de- 
parting citizens. No explanation was ever given; possibly it was an attempt 
to burnish the Soviet position in the Arab world, the precariousness of 
which had most recently been demonstrated by the expulsion of Soviet 
combat troops from Egypt. Or else the exit tax may have been designed 
to generate foreign exchange in the expectation that it would be paid for 
by American supporters of increased emigration. Fearful that the flow of 
emigration might dry up, Jewish groups appealed to both the Nixon 
Administration and their longtime supporter Henry Jackson. 

While the Nixon Administration continued to work quietly to resolve 
the issue with Ambassador Dobrynin, Jackson devised an ingenious 
means of publicly pressuring the Soviet Union. As part of the 1972 sum- 
mit, the United States had signed an agreement granting the Soviet Union 
“Most Favored Nation” (MEN) status in return for a settlement of the 
wartime Lend-Lease debt. In October 1972, Jackson introduced an amend- 
ment to bar MFN status to any country that restricted emigration. It was a 
tactically brilliant stroke. Most Favored Nation status sounds much more 
significant than it really is. What it denotes is nondiscriminatory status; it 
grants no special favors but simply extends to the recipient whatever 
privileges are available to all nations with which the United States main- 


753 



Diplomacy 


tains normal commercial relations (which then numbered over a hun- 
dred). MFN status facilitates normal trade on the basis of commercial 
reciprocity. Given the state of the Soviet economy, the level of such trade 
was not expected to be large. What the Jackson Amendment achieved was 
to make Soviet emigration practices a subject of not just public diplomacy 
but of legislative action by the American Congress. 

There was no disagreement on substance between the Administration 
and Jackson. Indeed, the Administration had taken a stand on a number 
of other human rights issues. For example, I had made numerous and 
insistent appeals to Dobrynin on behalf of the dissident writer Aleksandr 
Solzhenitsyn which contributed to his leaving the Soviet Union. Jackson, 
however, did not favor quiet diplomacy in the pursuit of human rights 
and insisted that the American commitment to it be demonstrably af- 
firmed — its successes vaunted, and its failures penalized. 

In the beginning, the Congressional pressures served as useful rein- 
forcements to the Administration’s own efforts in the same direction. 
Soon, however, the difference went beyond method. Nixon, who had 
originated the concept of encouraging Jewish emigration, had done so as 
a humanitarian gesture (and perhaps as a marginally political one, al- 
though he never made use of it publicly). But he drew the line at subordi- 
nating all East-West relations to the issue of Jewish emigration because 
he did not believe that the American national interest was involved to that 
extent. 

To Jackson and his supporters, the issue of Jewish emigration was a 
surrogate for the ideological confrontation with communism. Not surpris- 
ingly, they treated every Soviet concession as proof that their pressure 
tactics were working. The Soviet leaders did revoke the exit tax — whether 
due to remonstrations by the White House, the Jackson Amendment, or, 
more likely, both, though the final verdict must await the opening of 
Soviet archives. Emboldened, the Administration’s critics asked for a dou- 
bling of the Jewish emigration figures and for the removal of restrictions 
on emigration for other nationalities according to a schedule to be ap- 
proved by the United States. The Jackson forces also legislated restrictions 
on loans to the Soviet Union by the Export/Import Bank (the Stevenson 
Amendment) so that, on commercial matters, the Soviet Union ended up 
in a worse position after detente than before the relaxation of East-West 
tensions. 

As the leader of a country that was just emerging from a debilitating 
war and heading into a crisis of the presidency, Nixon would run only 
those risks which his conception of the national interest required and 
which his country was prepared to back up. Yet his critics wanted Ameri- 


754 



Detente and Its Discontents 


can diplomacy to bring about the downfall of the Soviet system through 
unilateral demands in arms control, the withholding of trade, and a chal- 
lenging advocacy of human rights. In the process, there occurred an 
extraordinary reversal in the positions of some of the key participants in 
the national debate. The New York Times had warned editorially in 1971 
that “the tactic of withholding American trade as leverage for some later 
bargain over unrelated issues is far less likely to influence Soviet policy 
favorably than is the trade itself. . . .” 9 Two years later, that editorial writer 
had reversed course. He condemned a trip by Treasury Secretary George 
Shultz to the Soviet Union as evidence that “the Administration is so 
intent on trade and detente that it is willing to shunt aside the equally 
important concern of the American people for human rights every- 
where.” 10 

Nixon had sought to encourage moderation in Soviet international 
conduct by making restraint in Soviet foreign policy the litmus test of 
increased trade with America. His opponents took linkage a step further 
by seeking to use trade as a means of producing domestic upheaval in the 
Soviet Union, and at a time when the Soviet Union was still strong and 
confident. Assaulted as a Cold Warrior four years earlier, Nixon was now 
castigated for being too soft and trusting toward the Soviet Union — surely 
the first time that this particular charge had been leveled against the man 
who had started his political career in the anticommunist investigations 
of the late 1940s. 

Soon the very concept of improving Soviet-American relations was 
being challenged, as in this editorial from The Washington Post. 

The very difficult question of what is to be the substance of Soviet- 
American “detente” is passing from a debating phase to a political 
phase. A significant number of Americans now appear to believe it is 
neither desirable, possible, nor safe to improve relations with the So- 
viet Union unless the Kremlin liberalizes some of its domestic poli- 
cies . 11 

America was veering back toward the true faith of Acheson and Dulles 
and of NSC document 68: the belief that a fundamental change in Soviet 
purposes and domestic practices had to precede serious negotiations 
between the United States and the Soviet Union. But whereas the early 
Cold Warriors had been content to rely on containment to bring this 
change about in the fullness of time, their successors were promising 
significant changes in the Soviet system as the result of direct American 
pressure and publicized American demands. 


755 



Diplomacy 


On several occasions during the Brezhnev era, Nixon and his associates 
confronted the Soviet leadership when the Soviet will to power had not 
yet eroded. And we found them to be formidable adversaries. A wholesale 
assault on the communist system under conditions of nuclear parity 
promised to be long and bitter. After Vietnam and in the midst of Wa- 
tergate, we found ourselves in the position of a swimmer who, having 
just barely escaped drowning, is being urged to cross the English Channel 
and is then accused of pessimism when he displays a lack of enthusiasm 
at the prospect. Jackson had distinguished himself on the ramparts of the 
anticommunist geopolitical struggle, as he would do again; the same 
could not always be said of many of his recruits, whose sincerity we 
doubted far less than their staying power. 

In an international crisis, the president is the indispensable focal point 
for the government. From this point of view alone, the Watergate period 
was hardly the ideal time for launching a deliberate policy of Soviet- 
American confrontation. The President was in the process of being im- 
peached; the wounds of Vietnam were still open; and distrust of the 
Administration was so great that, after the Soviets had made an explicit 
threat to intervene in the war in the Middle East, a respected journalist 
found it possible to ask at a press conference in October 1973 whether 
United States forces had been put on alert to deflect attention from Wa- 
tergate. 

The controversy had returned to a debate dating as far back as John 
Quincy Adams about whether the United States should be content to 
affirm its moral values or whether it should crusade on their behalf. 
Nixon had sought to relate America’s purposes to its capabilities. Within 
these limits he was prepared to enlist America’s influence to promote its 
values, as his stand on Jewish emigration had shown. His critics insisted 
on the immediate applicability of universal principles, and impatiently 
dismissed questions of feasibility as proof of moral inadequacy or of 
historical pessimism. In urging that American idealism be discriminating, 
the Nixon Administration felt it was performing a vital educational func- 
tion. How ironic that, at a moment when America was being told that it 
must learn its geopolitical limits in Vietnam, it should be urged by some 
national figures — several of whom had been in the vanguard of the Viet- 
nam critique — to embark on an unlimited agenda of global intervention- 
ism on humanitarian issues. 

As the Reagan years would demonstrate, a bolder policy toward the 
Soviet Union had much to recommend it, although these successes were 
not to come about until a later stage of evolution in Soviet-American 
relations. But while the detente debate was raging, America had yet to 


756 



Detente and Its Discontents 


recover from Vietnam and to lay Watergate to rest. And the Soviet leaders 
first had to undergo a turnover in generations. The way the debate devel- 
oped in the early 1970s, however, prevented an appropriate balance from 
being struck between the idealism which has sparked all the great Ameri- 
can initiatives and the realism mandated by the changing global environ- 
ment. 

The critics of detente vastly oversimplified their case; the Nixon Admin- 
istration contributed to the deadlock by responding too pedantically. 
Stung by the assault of former allies and friends, Nixon dismissed the 
criticism as having been politically motivated. However true that assess- 
ment might have been, it was hardly a profound insight to charge profes- 
sional politicians with having political motives. What the Administration 
should have asked itself was why so many politicians were finding it 
expedient to join the Jackson chorus. 

Trapped between undifferentiating moralism and overemphasis on 
geopolitics, American policy at the end of Nixon’s term became stale- 
mated. As the carrot of increased trade was withdrawn, the stick of in- 
creased defense spending, or even of a willingness to face geopolitical 
confrontations, was not forthcoming. SALT stalemated; Jewish emigration 
from the Soviet Union slowed to a trickle; and the communist geopolitical 
offensive resumed when a Cuban expeditionary force was sent to Angola, 
which established a communist government there while American con- 
servatives opposed a strong American response. I pointed out the diffi- 
culties: 

If one group of critics undermines arms control negotiations and cuts 
off the prospect of more constructive ties with the Soviet Union, while 
another group cuts away at our defense budgets and intelligence ser- 
vices and thwarts American resistance to Soviet adventurism, both com- 
bined will — whether they have intended it or not — end by wrecking 
the nation’s ability to conduct a strong, creative, moderate and prudent 
foreign policy . 12 

So it happened that even major diplomatic achievements of this period 
became controversial. The American diplomacy which has dominated the 
Middle East since 1973, and which had sharply reduced the Soviet influ- 
ence in that strategic region, was presented for several years as a setback, 
until the momentum of the peace process dispelled even the skeptics’ 
reservations. 

A similar fate befell what posterity has judged to be a significant West- 
ern diplomatic achievement — the thirty-five-nation Conference on Euro- 


757 



Diplomacy 


pean Security and Cooperation, which produced the Helsinki Accords. 
This monster diplomatic process grew out of Moscow’s deep-rooted 
sense of insecurity and unquenchable thirst for legitimacy. Even as it was 
building an enormous military establishment and holding down a score 
of nations, the Kremlin acted as if it were in constant need of reassurance. 
Its huge and growing nuclear arsenal notwithstanding, the Soviet Union 
demanded from the very countries it had been threatening for decades 
and which it had consigned to the dustbin of history some formula it 
could use to consecrate its acquisitions. In this sense, the European Secu- 
rity Conference became Brezhnev’s substitute for the German peace 
treaty that Khrushchev had failed to extract with his Berlin ultimatum — 
and a grand confirmation of the postwar status quo. 

The exact benefit envisaged by Moscow was not self-evident. The insis- 
tence with which the cradle of ideological revolution was seeking con- 
firmation of its legitimacy from the proclaimed victims of historical 
inevitability was a symptom of extraordinary self-doubt. Probably the So- 
viet leaders were banking on the possibility that the Conference might 
leave behind some residual institutions to water down NATO, or even to 
make it irrelevant. 

In this they deluded themselves. No NATO country was waiting to 
substitute the declaratory and bureaucratic paraphernalia of a European 
Security Conference for the military reality of NATO or the presence of 
American military forces on the Continent. Moscow, as it turned out, had 
much more to lose than the democracies from a conference which ended 
up giving all the participants, including the United States, a voice in the 
political arrangements of Eastern Europe. 

After a period of ambivalence, the Nixon Administration went along 
with the proposed conference. Recognizing that the Soviet Union had 
its own, quite opposite, agenda, we nevertheless perceived a long-term 
opportunity. The borders of the countries of Eastern Europe had already 
been recognized by peace treaties concluded at the end of World War II 
between the wartime Allies and Germany’s wartime satellites in Eastern 
Europe. They had been explicitly confirmed further in Willy Brandt’s 
bilateral agreements between the Federal Republic and the countries of 
Eastern Europe as well as by other NATO democracies, especially France, 
with the countries of Eastern Europe (including Poland and the Soviet 
Union). Moreover, all NATO allies were pressing for a European Security 
Conference; at every meeting with their Soviet counterparts, Western 
European leaders moved closer to accepting the Soviet agenda. 

Thus, in 1971 the Nixon Administration decided to add the European 
Security Conference to its list of incentives for encouraging Soviet moder- 
ation. We employed our strategy of linkage which was summed up by 


758 



Detente and Its Discontents 


State Department Counsellor Helmut Sonnenfeldt as boastfully as it was 
accurate: “We sold it for the German- Soviet treaty, we sold it for the 
Berlin agreement, and we sold it again for the opening of the MBFR 
[Mutual Balanced Force Reductions].” 13 The Nixon and then Ford Admin- 
istrations shaped the outcome by making America’s attendance depen- 
dent on restrained Soviet conduct on all other issues. They insisted on 
the satisfactory conclusion of the Berlin negotiations and the initiation of 
negotiations on mutual force reductions in Europe. When these were 
concluded, delegations from thirty-five nations came to Geneva, though 
their arduous negotiations were largely unreported in the Western press. 
Then, in 1975, the Conference emerged from obscurity when it was an- 
nounced that agreements had been reached which would be signed at a 
summit-level meeting in Helsinki. American influence had helped to con- 
fine the recognition of borders to an obligation not to change them by 
force, which was a mere duplication of the UN Charter. Since no Euro- 
pean country had the capacity to bring about a forcible change or a policy 
to that effect, the formal renunciation was hardly a Soviet gain. Even 
this limited recognition of legitimacy was vitiated by a statement of princi- 
ple which preceded it — largely negotiated by the United States. It de- 
clared that the signatory states “consider that their frontiers can be 
changed, in accordance with international law, by peaceful means and by 
agreement.” 14 

The most significant provision of the Helsinki Agreement turned out to 
be the so-called Basket III on human rights. (Baskets I and II dealt with 
political and economic issues, respectively.) Basket III was destined to 
play a major role in the disintegration of the Soviet satellite orbit, and 
became a testimonial to all human rights activists in NATO countries. The 
American delegation contributed to the final provisions of the Helsinki 
Accords. But it is the human rights activists who deserve tribute, because, 
without the pressures which they exerted, progress would have been 
slower, and there probably would have been less of it. 

Basket III obliged all signatories to practice and foster certain enumer- 
ated basic human rights. Its Western drafters hoped that the provisions 
would create an international standard that would inhibit Soviet repres- 
sion of dissidents and revolutionaries. As it turned out, heroic reformers 
in Eastern Europe used Basket III as a rallying point in their fights to free 
their countries from Soviet domination. Both Vaclav Havel in Czechoslo- 
vakia and Lech Walesa in Poland earned their place in the pantheon 
of freedom fighters by using these provisions, both domestically and 
internationally, to undermine not only Soviet domination but the commu- 
nist regimes in their own countries. 

The European Security Conference thus came to play an important 


759 



Diplomacy 


dual role: in its planning stages, it moderated Soviet conduct in Europe 
and, afterward, it accelerated the collapse of the Soviet Empire. 

The memory of contemporaries’ attitudes toward the Helsinki Confer- 
ence has mercifully faded. President Ford was accused of a historic sellout 
for attending the Conference and for signing the main document, the so- 
called Final Act, in 1975. The New York Times editorialized: 


The 35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, now 
nearing its climax after 32 months of semantic quibbling, should not 
have happened. Never have so many struggled for so long over so little. 

... If it is too late to call off the Helsinki summit . . . every effort must be 
made there, publicly as well as privately, to prevent euphoria in the 
West. 15 

I summed up the Ford Administration’s attitude in a speech three weeks 
later: 

The United States pursues the process of easing tensions from a posi- 
tion of self-confidence and strength. It is not we who were on the 
defensive at Helsinki; it is not we who were being challenged by all the 
delegations to live up to the principles being signed. At Helsinki, for 
the first time in the postwar period, human rights and fundamental 
freedoms became recognized subjects of East-West discourse and nego- 
tiation. The conference put forward our standards of humane conduct, 
which have been— and still are— a beacon of hope to millions. 16 

It was a melancholy period, during which persuasion seemed futile. In a 
speech in March 1976, 1 challenged the challengers with some exaspera- 
tion: 


No policy will soon, if ever, eliminate the competition and irreconcil- 
able ideological differences between the United States and the Soviet 
Union. Nor will it make all interests compatible. We are engaged in a 
protracted process with inevitable ups and downs. But there is no 
alternative to the policy of penalties for adventurism and incentives for 
restraint. What do those who speak so glibly about “one-way streets” or 
“preemptive concessions” propose concretely that this country do? 
What precisely has been given up? What level of confrontation do they 
seek? What threats would they make? What risks would they run? What 
precise changes in our defense posture, what level of expenditure over 
what period of time, do they advocate? How concretely do they suggest 
managing the U.S.-Soviet relationship in an era of strategic equality? 17 


760 



Detente and Its Discontents 


Nixon’s “structure of peace” had responded to the nation’s yearning for 
an end to distant adventures. Yet, for most of their history, Americans had 
taken peace for granted; defining peace as the absence of war was both 
too passive and too uninspiring to serve as a permanent theme of Ameri- 
can policy. The Nixon Administration’s concept of international relations 
was far more realistic than the one it had inherited and, in the long run, 
represented a necessary adjustment of American foreign policy. But it 
was not grounded on familiar principles — a lacuna which subsequent 
administrations filled in. In America, a geopolitical interpretation of inter- 
national affairs had become as necessary as it was, by itself, insufficient. 
Nixon’s critics, on the other hand, acted as if the international environ- 
ment were somehow irrelevant, and as if American preferences could be 
imposed unilaterally and without requiring any more than an American 
proclamation. 

In seeking to devise a viable approach to the revolutionary changes 
over which it presided, the Nixon Administration veered too far in the 
direction of stressing what it perceived as America’s geopolitical necessi- 
ties. Its critics and immediate successors tried to compensate by invoking 
absolute versions of American principles. The inevitable controversy was 
made unnecessarily painful by the disintegration of domestic unity under 
the dual impact of Vietnam and Watergate. 

Yet, having held the world together during the Cold War, America did 
rediscover its bearing and managed to turn the tables on its Soviet oppo- 
nent. And when the geopolitical threat vanished along with the ideologi- 
cal challenge, America was, ironically, forced without any choice in the 
1990s into an altogether new consideration of where its national interest 
might lie. 


761 




CHAPTER THIRTY 


The End of the Cold War: 
Reagan and Gorbachev 

The Cold War had begun at a time when America was expecting an era 
of peace. And the Cold War ended at a moment when America was girding 
itself for a new era of protracted conflict. The Soviet empire collapsed 
even more suddenly than it had erupted beyond its borders; with equal 
speed, America reversed its attitude toward Russia, shifting in a matter of 
months from hostility to friendship. 

This momentous change unfolded under the aegis of two rather im- 


762 




The End of the Cold War 


probable collaborators. Ronald Reagan had been elected in reaction to a « 
period of America’s seeming retreat to reaffirm the traditional verities of 
American exceptionalism. Gorbachev, who had risen to eminence 
through the brutal struggles of the communist hierarchy, was determined 
to reinvigorate what he considered a superior Soviet ideology. Reagan 
and Gorbachev each believed in the ultimate victory of his own side. 
There was, however, a crucial difference between these two unexpected 
collaborators: Reagan understood the mainsprings of his society, whereas 
Gorbachev had completely lost touch with his. Both leaders appealed to 
what they considered best in their systems. But where Reagan liberated 
his people’s spirit by tapping reservoirs of initiative and self-confidence, 
Gorbachev precipitated the demise of the system he represented by de- 
manding reform of which it proved incapable. 

The collapse of Indochina in 1975 had been followed in America by a 
retreat from Angola and a deepening of domestic divisions, and by an 
extraordinary surge in expansionism on the part of the Soviet Union. 
Cuban military forces had spread from Angola to Ethiopia in tandem with 
thousands of Soviet combat advisers. In Cambodia, Vietnamese troops 
backed and supplied by the Soviet Union were subjugating that tor- 
mented country. Afghanistan was occupied by over 100,000 Soviet troops. 

The government of the pro-Western Shah of Iran collapsed and was re- 
placed by a radically anti-American fundamentalist regime which seized 
fifty-two Americans, almost all of whom were officials, as hostages. What- 
ever the causes, the dominoes indeed appeared to be falling. 

Yet, at this seeming nadir of America’s international position, commu- 
nism began to unravel. At one moment, at the beginning of the 1980s, it 
was as if communist momentum might sweep all before it; at the next, as 
history measures time, communism was self-destructing. Within a decade, 
the Eastern European satellite orbit dissolved and the Soviet empire fell 
apart, disgorging nearly all the Russian acquisitions since the time of Peter 
the Great. No world power had ever disintegrated so totally or so rapidly 
without losing a war. 

The Soviet empire failed in part because its own history had tempted 
it inexorably toward overextension. The Soviet state was born against all 
odds, and then managed to survive civil war, isolation, and a succession 
of villainous rulers. In 1934-41, it skillfully deflected the looming Second 
World War info what it termed an imperialist civil war, and overcame the 
Nazi onslaught with the assistance of the Western Allies. Afterward, in the 
face of America’s atomic monopoly, it managed to establish a satellite 
orbit in Eastern Europe and, in the post-Stalin period, to turn itself into a 
global superpower. At first, Soviet armies threatened contiguous areas 


763 



Diplomacy 


but later extended their reach to distant continents. Soviet missile forces 
were growing at a rate which caused many American experts to fear 
that Soviet strategic superiority was imminent. Like the British leaders 
Palmerston and Disraeli in the nineteenth century, American statesmen 
perceived Russia to be on the march everywhere. 

The fatal flaw in all this bloated imperialism was that the Soviet leaders 
lost their sense of proportion along the way, overestimating the Soviet 
system’s ability to consolidate its gains, both militarily and economically, 
and forgetting that they were challenging literally all the other major 
powers from a very weak base. Nor could Soviet leaders ever admit to 
themselves that their system was mortally deficient in its capacity to gen- 
erate initiative and creativity; that, indeed, the Soviet Union, despite its 
military power, was still a very backward country. They failed the unfor- 
giving test of survival because the qualities by which the Soviet Politburo 
rose to eminence stifled the creativity needed to enable their society to 
grow, let alone to sustain the conflict which they had provoked. 

Quite simply, the Soviet Union was neither strong enough nor dynamic 
enough for the role its leaders had assigned it. Stalin may have had a 
foreboding of the real balance of forces when he reacted to the American 
arms buildup during the Korean War with his Peace Note of 1952 (see 
chapter 20). In the desperate transition period following Stalin’s death, 
his successors misinterpreted their ability to survive without being chal- 
lenged by the West as proof of Western weakness. And they beguiled 
themselves by what they perceived to be dramatic Soviet breakthroughs 
in the developing world. Khrushchev and his successors drew the conclu- 
sion that they could do the tyrant one better. Rather than dividing the 
capitalist world, which had been Stalin’s basic strategy, they would defeat 
it with ultimatums over Berlin, missiles in Cuba, and adventurism 
throughout the developing world. That effort, however, went so far be- 
yond the Soviet capacity as to transform stagnation into collapse. 

The communist disintegration became visible during Reagan’s second 
term and turned irreversible by the time he left office. Considerable 
credit is due to the presidencies preceding Reagan’s, as well as to that of 
his immediate successor, George Bush, who presided skillfully over the 
denouement. Nevertheless, it was Ronald Reagan’s presidency which 
marked the turning point. 

Reagan’s was an astonishing performance — and, to academic observ- 
ers, nearly incomprehensible. Reagan knew next to no history, and the 
little he did know he tailored to support his firmly held preconceptions. 
He treated biblical references to Armageddon as operational predictions. 
Many of the historical anecdotes he was so fond of recounting had no 


764 



The End of the Cold War 


basis in fact, as facts are generally understood. In a private conversation, 
he once equated Gorbachev with Bismarck, arguing that both had over- 
come identical domestic obstacles by moving away from a centrally 
planned economy toward the free market. I advised a mutual friend that 
Reagan should be warned never to repeat this preposterous proposition 
to a German interlocutor. The friend, however, thought it unwise to pass 
on the warning, lest it drive the comparison all the more deeply into 
Reagan’s mind. 

The details of foreign policy bored Reagan. He had absorbed a few 
basic ideas about the dangers of appeasement, the evils of communism, 
and the greatness of his own country, but analysis of substantive issues 
was not his forte. All of this caused me to remark, during what I thought 
was an off-the-record talk before a conference of historians at the Library 
of Congress: “When you talk to Reagan, you sometimes wonder why it 
occurred to anyone that he should be president, or even governor. But 
what you historians have to explain is how so unintellectual a man could 
have dominated California for eight years, and Washington already for 
nearly seven.” 

The media avidly pounced on the first pan of my statement. Yet, for 
the historian, the second part is by far the more interesting. When all was 
said and done, a president with the shallowest academic background was 
to develop a foreign policy of extraordinary consistency and relevance. 
Reagan might well have had only a few basic ideas, but these also hap- 
pened to be the core foreign policy issues of his period, which demon- 
strates that a sense of direction and having the strength of one’s 
convictions are the key ingredients of leadership. The question of who 
drafted Reagan’s pronouncements on foreign policy — and no president 
drafts his own — is almost irrelevant. Folklore has it that Reagan was the 
tool of his speech-writers, but that is an illusion fostered by many a 
speech-writer. After all, Reagan had himself selected the people who 
crafted his speeches, and he delivered them with extraordinary convic- 
tion and persuasiveness. Any acquaintance with Reagan leaves little doubt 
that they expressed his actual views and, on some issues, such as the 
Strategic Defense Initiative, he was far ahead of his entourage. 

In the American system of government, in which the president is the 
only nationally elected official, coherence in foreign policy emerges — if 
at all — from presidential pronouncements. These serve as the most effec- 
tive directive to the sprawling and self-willed bureaucracy and supply the 
criteria for public or Congressional debates. Reagan put forward a foreign 
policy doctrine of great coherence and considerable intellectual power. 
He possessed an extraordinary intuitive rapport with the wellsprings of 


765 



Diplomacy 


American motivation. At the same time, he understood the essential brit- 
tleness of the Soviet system, a perception which ran contrary to most 
expert opinion, even in his own conservative camp. 

Reagan had an uncanny talent for uniting the American people. And he 
had an unusually pleasant and genuinely affable personality. Even the 
victims of his rhetoric found it difficult to take it personally. Though he 
savaged me during his failed bid for the presidential nomination in 1976, 
I found it impossible to hold a lasting resentment, despite the fact that, as 
National Security Adviser, I had been briefing him for years without any 
protest on his part about the very policies he was now assaulting. When 
it was all over, I remembered not the campaign rhetoric but the combina- 
tion of common sense and epigrammatic goodwill with which Reagan 
conducted himself during the briefing sessions. During the Middle East 
War of 1973, 1 told him that we would replace Israeli losses in aircraft but 
were uncertain as to how to limit the Arab reaction. “Why don’t you say 
that you will replace all the aircraft the Arabs claim they have shot down?” 
Reagan suggested — a proposal which would turn the wildly inflated Arab 
propaganda against its originators. 

Reagan’s bland veneer hid an extraordinarily complex character. He 
was both congenial and remote, full of good cheer but, in the end, aloof. 
The bonhomie was his way of establishing distance between himself and 
others. If he treated everyone with equal friendliness — and regaled them 
all with the same stories — no one would have a special claim on him. The 
repository of jokes that were recycled from conversation to conversation 
served as protection against being blindsided. Like many actors, Reagan 
was the quintessential loner — as charming as he was self-centered. An 
individual widely perceived to have been an intimate of his said to me 
once that Reagan was both the friendliest and the most distant man he 
had ever known. 

Reagan’s 1976 campaign rhetoric notwithstanding, there was no sig- 
nificant conceptual difference among the various assessments of the inter- 
national environment by the Nixon, Ford, and Reagan Administrations. 
All three were determined to resist the Soviet geopolitical offensive and 
considered history to be on the side of the democracies. There was, 
however, an enormous difference in their tactics and in the way in which 
each of these administrations explained its policies to the American peo- 
ple. 

Shocked by the domestic divisions of the Vietnam War, Nixon had 
believed that a prior demonstration of serious efforts on behalf of peace 
was the precondition for sustaining whatever confrontations might be 
necessary to prevent further Soviet expansion. Leading a country that was 


766 



The End of the Cold War 


tired of retreat, Reagan justified resistance to Soviet expansionism by an 
insistently confrontational style. Like Woodrow Wilson, Reagan under- 
stood that the American people, having marched throughout their history 
to the drumbeat of exceptionalism, would find their ultimate inspiration 
in historic ideals, not in geopolitical analysis. In this sense, Nixon was to 
Reagan as Theodore Roosevelt had been to Woodrow Wilson. Like Roose- 
velt, Nixon had had a far better understanding of the workings of interna- 
tional relations; like Wilson, Reagan had a much surer grasp of the 
workings of the American soul. 

Reagan’s rhetoric about America’s unique moral standing mirrored 
what almost every other president has said at one time or another in this 
century. What rendered Reagan’s particular variant of American excep- 
tionalism unique was his literal interpretation of it as a guide to the 
everyday conduct of foreign policy. Whereas Reagan’s predecessors had 
invoked American principles as the underpinning of a particular initiative 
— say, the League of Nations or the Marshall Plan — Reagan mobilized 
them as weapons in the day-to-day struggle against communism, as in this 
speech before the American Legion on February 22, 1983: 

By wedding the timeless truths and values Americans have always cher- 
ished to the realities of today’s world, we have forged the beginnings 
of a fundamentally new direction in American foreign policy — a policy 
based on the unashamed, unapologetic explaining of our own priceless 
free institutions 1 

Reagan rejected the “guilt complex” which he identified with the Carter 
Administration, and proudly defended America’s record as “the greatest 
force for peace anywhere in the world today.” 2 In his very first press 
conference, he labeled the Soviet Union an outlaw empire prepared “to 
commit any crime, to lie, to cheat,” in order to achieve its goals. 3 It would 
be the precursor of his 1983 description of the Soviet Union as the “evil 
empire,” a direct moral challenge from which all his predecessors would 
have recoiled. Reagan overrode conventional diplomatic wisdom, and he 
oversimplified America’s virtues in pursuit of a self-appointed mission 
to convince the American people that the East-West ideological conflict 
mattered and that some international struggles are about winners and 
losers, not about staying power or diplomacy. 

The rhetoric of Reagan’s first term marked the formal end of the period 
of detente. America’s goal was no longer a relaxation of tensions but 
crusade and conversion. Reagan had been elected on the promise of 
militant anticommunism, and he was true to his word. In the fortunate 


767 



Diplomacy 


position of dealing with a Soviet Union in precipitate decline, he rejected 
Nixon’s emphasis on national interest as being too relativistic and dis- 
dained Carter’s diffidence as being too defeatist. Instead, Reagan pre- 
sented an apocalyptic vision of the conflict made more bearable by the 
historical inevitability of the outcome. In a speech at Westminster Hall in 
London in June 1982, he described his perception of the Soviet Union: 

In an ironic sense Karl Marx was right. We are witnessing today a great 
revolutionary crisis, a crisis where the demands of the economic order 
are conflicting directly with those of the political order. But the crisis is 
happening not in the free, non-Marxist West, but in the home of Marx- 
ism-Leninism, the Soviet Union 

Overcentralized, with little or no incentives, year after year the Soviet 
system pours its best resources into the making of instruments of de- 
struction. The constant shrinkage of economic growth combined with 
the growth of military production is putting a heavy strain on the Soviet 
people. 

What we see here is a political structure that no longer corresponds 
to its economic base, a society where productive forces are hampered 
by political ones. 4 

When Nixon and I had said much the same thing ten years earlier, it had 
intensified the conservative critique of detente. Conservatives distrusted 
the invocation of historical evolution in the service of detente because 
they feared that negotiations with the communists might lead to moral 
disarmament. But they found the concept of inevitable victory appealing 
as a tool of confrontation. 

Reagan believed that relations with the Soviet Union would improve if 
he could make it share his fear of nuclear Armageddon. He was deter- 
mined to bring home to the Kremlin the risks of continuing expan- 
sionism. A decade earlier, his rhetoric would have driven domestic civil 
disobedience out of control and might have led to confrontation with a 
still confident Soviet Union; a decade later, it would have appeared anti- 
quated. In the conditions of the 1980s, it laid the foundation for a period 
of unprecedented East-West dialogue. 

Inevitably, Reagan’s rhetoric came under sharp attack from believers in 
the established orthodoxies. “TRB,” in The New Republic of April 11, 1983, 
was outraged at Reagan’s description of the Soviet Union as an “evil 
empire,” calling it “primitive prose and apocalyptic symbolism”; 5 “primi- 
tive” was also the reaction of Anthony Lewis in The New York Times of 
March 10, 1983 6 In 1981, the distinguished Harvard Professor Stanley 
Hoffmann denounced Reagan’s militant style as “machismo,” “neo-nation- 


768 



The End of the Cold War 


alism,” and a form of “fundamentalist reaction” that had little to offer to 
a complex world in which American economic weaknesses were said to 
be no less serious than those of the Soviet Union. 7 

As it turned out, Reagan’s rhetoric did not thwart major negotiations, 
as the critics had predicted. On the contrary, during Reagan’s second 
term, an East-West dialogue of a scope and intensity not seen since the 
Nixon period of detente took place. This time, however, the negotiations 
enjoyed the support of public opinion and were applauded by the conser- 
vatives. 

If Reagan’s approach to the ideological conflict was a simplified version 
of Wilsonianism, his concept of the resolution of that struggle was equally 
rooted in American utopianism. Though framing the issue as a struggle 
between good and evil, Reagan was far from arguing that the conflict had 
to be fought to the finish. Rather — in typical American fashion — he was 
convinced that communist intransigence was based more on ignorance 
than on congenital ill will, more on misunderstanding than on purposeful 
hostility. Hence, in Reagan’s view, the conflict was likely to end with the 
conversion of the adversary. In 1981, while recuperating from an attempt 
on his life, Reagan sent a handwritten letter to Leonid Brezhnev that tried 
to dispel Soviet suspicions of the United States — as if seventy-five years 
of communist ideology could be removed by a personal appeal. It was, 
almost verbatim, the same assurance which Truman had extended to 
Stalin at the end of World War II (see chapter 17). 

It is often implied . . . that we have imperialistic designs, and thus coasti- 
tute a threat to your own security and that of the newly emerging 
nations. There not only is no evidence to support such a charge, there 
is solid evidence that the United States, when it could have dominated 

the world with no risk to itself, made no effort whatsoever to do so 

May I say, there is absolutely no substance to charges that the United 
States is guilty of imperialism or attempts to impose its will on other 
countries, by use of force 

Mr. President, should we not be concerned with eliminating the 
obstacles which prevent our people, those you and I represent, from 
achieving their most cherished goals? 8 

How was one to reconcile the conciliatory tone of Reagan’s letter and the 
author’s assumption that he possessed some special credibility with the 
recipient with Reagan’s assertion, made only a few weeks earlier, that 
Soviet leaders were capable of any crime? Reagan felt no need to explain 
this apparent inconsistency, perhaps because he deeply believed in both 


769 



Diplomacy 


propositions — the evil of Soviet conduct as well as the susceptibility of 
Soviet leaders to ideological conversion. 

Thus, following Brezhnev’s death in November 1982, Reagan sent a 
handwritten note — on July 11, 1983 — to Brezhnev’s successor, Yuri An- 
dropov, once again disclaiming any aggressive designs. 9 When Andropov 
soon died as well and the infirm and aged Konstantin Chernenko became 
his successor (an obvious interim appointment), Reagan confided to his 
diary, which was clearly intended for publication: 

I have a gut feeling I’d like to talk to him about our problems man to 
man and see if I could convince him there would be a material benefit 
to the Soviets if they’d join the family of nations, etc. 10 

Six months later, on September 28, 1984, Gromyko paid his first visit to 
the White House during the Reagan Administration. Again, Reagan had 
recourse to his diary, to the effect that his principal goal was to remove 
the Soviet leaders’ suspicions of the United States: 

I have a feeling we’ll get nowhere with arms reductions while they are 
as suspicious of our motives as we are of theirs. I believe we need a 
meeting to see if we can’t make them understand we have no designs 
on them but think they have designs on us. 11 

If Soviet conduct had been caused by suspicion of the United States for 
two generations, Reagan might well have assumed that the feeling was 
ingrained in the Soviet system and history. The fervent hope — especially 
in so vocal an anticommunist — that the Soviets’ wariness could be re- 
moved in a single conversation with their Foreign Minister (who more- 
over represented the quintessence of communist rule) can only be 
explained by the irrepressible American conviction that understanding 
between peoples is normal, that tension is an aberration, and that trust 
can be generated by the strenuous demonstration of goodwill. 

So it happened that Reagan, the scourge of communism, found nothing 
strange about describing the night before his first meeting with Gorba- 
chev in 1985 and his feelings of nervous anticipation in terms of the hope 
that the meeting would settle the conflicts of two generations — an atti- 
tude closer to that of Jimmy Carter than of Richard Nixon: 

Starting with Brezhnev, I’d dreamed of personally going one-on-one 
with a Soviet leader because I thought we might be able to accomplish 
things our countries’ diplomats couldn’t do because they didn’t have 


770 



The End of the Cold War 


the authority. Putting that another way, I felt that if you got the top 
people negotiating and talking at a summit and then the two of you 
came out arm in arm saying, “We’ve agreed to this,” the bureaucrats 
wouldn’t be able to louse up the agreement. Until Gorbachev, I never 
got an opportunity to try out my idea. Now I had my chance . 12 

Despite his rhetoric about ideological confrontation and the reality of 
conducting a geopolitical conflict, Reagan did not in his own heart believe 
in structural or geopolitical causes of tension. He and his associates con- 
sidered concern with the balance of power too confining and too pessi- 
mistic. They strove not for gradualism, but for a final outcome. This faith 
gave the Reagan team an extraordinary tactical flexibility. 

A biographer has written about one of Reagan’s “dreams,” which I too 
have heard him recount: 

One of Ronald Reagan’s fantasies as president was that he would take 
Mikhail Gorbachev on a tour of the United States so the Soviet leader 
could see how ordinary Americans lived. Reagan often talked about it. 

He imagined that he and Gorbachev would fly by helicopter over a 
working-class community, viewing a factory and its parking lot filled 
with cars and then circling over the pleasant neighborhood where the 
factory workers lived in homes “with lawns and backyards, perhaps 
with a second car or a boat in the driveway, not the concrete rabbit 
warrens I’d seen in Moscow.” The helicopter would descend, and 
Reagan would invite Gorbachev to knock on doors and ask the resi- 
dents “what they think of our system. ” The workers would tell him how 
wonderful it was to live in America . 13 

Reagan clearly believed that he had a duty to speed Gorbachev’s, or any 
other Soviet leader’s, inevitable recognition that communist philosophy 
was in error, and that once Soviet misconceptions about the true nature 
of America had been cleared up, an era of conciliation would rapidly 
follow. In this sense, and despite all of his ideological fervor, Reagan’s 
views on the essence of international conflict remained strictly American- 
utopian. Since he did not believe in irreconcilable national interests, he 
could discern no insoluble conflicts between nations. Once Soviet leaders 
had changed their ideological views, the world would be spared the sorts 
of disputes which had characterized classical diplomacy. And he saw no 
intermediate stages between permanent conflict and lasting reconcilia- 
tion. 

Nevertheless, however optimistic, even “liberal,” Reagan’s views were 
of the ultimate outcome, he meant to reach his goal by means of relent- 


771 



Diplomacy 


less confrontation. According to his way of thinking, dedication to ending 
the Cold War did not require creating a “favorable” atmosphere or grant- 
ing the unilateral gestures which were so beloved by the advocates of 
permanent negotiations. Sufficiently American to view confrontation and 
conciliation as successive stages of policy, Reagan was the first postwar 
president to take the offensive both ideologically and geostrategically. 

The Soviet Union had not been obliged to deal with such a phenome- 
non since the tenure of John Foster Dulles — and Dulles had not been 
president, nor had he ever seriously attempted to implement his “libera- 
tion” policy. By contrast, Reagan and his associates took their professions 
literally. From the time of Reagan’s inauguration, they pursued two objec- 
tives simultaneously: to combat Soviet geopolitical pressure until the pro- 
cess of expansionism had been first arrested and then reversed; and, 
second, to launch a rearmament program designed to stop dead in its 
tracks the Soviet quest for strategic superiority, and to turn it into a 
strategic liability. 

The ideological vehicle for this reversal of roles was the issue of human 
rights, which Reagan and his advisers invoked to try to undermine the 
Soviet system. To be sure, his immediate predecessors had also affirmed 
the importance of human rights. Nixon had done so on the issue of 
emigration from the Soviet Union. Ford had taken the biggest step for- 
ward with Basket III of the Helsinki Accords (see chapter 29). Carter 
made human rights the centerpiece of his foreign policy and promoted 
it so intensely vis-a-vis America’s allies that his call for righteousness 
occasionally threatened their domestic cohesion. Reagan and his advisers 
went a step further by treating human rights as a tool for overthrowing 
communism and democratizing the Soviet Union, hence as the key to a 
peaceful world — as Reagan pointed out in his State of the Union Address 
on January 25, 1984: “Governments which rest upon the consent of the 
governed do not wage war on their neighbors.” 14 At Westminster in 1982, 
Reagan, hailing the tide of democracy around the world, called on the 
free nations 

... to foster the infrastructure of democracy, the system of a free press, 
unions, political parties, universities, which allows a people to choose 
their own way, to develop their own culture, to reconcile their own 
differences through peaceful means. 15 

The appeal to improve democracy at home was a prelude to a classically 
Wilsonian theme: “If the rest of this century is to witness the gradual 
growth of freedom and democratic ideals, we must take actions to assist 
the campaign for democracy.” 16 


772 



The End of the Cold War 


In fact, Reagan took Wilsonianism to its ultimate conclusion. America 
would not wait passively for free institutions to evolve, nor would it 
confine itself to resisting direct threats to its security. Instead, it would 
actively promote democracy, rewarding those countries which fulfilled 
its ideals and punishing those which fell short — even if they presented 
no other visible challenge or threat to America. The Reagan team thus 
turned the claims of the early Bolsheviks upside down: democratic values, 
not those of the Communist Manifesto, would be the wave of the future. 
And the Reagan team was consistent: it pressed both the conservative 
Pinochet regime in Chile and the authoritarian Marcos regime in the 
Philippines for reform; the former was induced to agree to a referendum 
and free elections, which replaced it; the latter was overthrown with 
American cooperation. 

At the same time, the crusade for democracy begged fundamental ques- 
tions which are of particular relevance to the post-Cold War period. How 
was one to reconcile this crusade with the long-held American doctrine 
of nonintervention in the domestic affairs of other states? To what extent 
should other objectives such as national security be subordinate to it? 
What price would America be willing to pay to promote its values? How 
was it to avoid both overextension and abdication? The post-Cold War 
world, which make the early Reagan years seem like distant history, will 
have to answer these questions. 

Yet when Reagan took office, such ambiguities did not worry him as 
much as devising a strategy to interrupt the relentless Soviet advance of 
the previous years. The goal of Reagan’s geostrategic offensive was to 
bring home to the Soviets that they had overreached. Rejecting the Brezh- 
nev Doctrine on the irreversibility of communist gains, Reagan’s strategy 
expressed the conviction that communism could be defeated, not merely 
contained. Reagan brought about the repeal of the Clark Amendment, 
which had prevented American aid to anticommunist forces in Angola, 
greatly stepped up support for the Afghan anti-Soviet guerrillas, devel- 
oped a major program to resist communist guerrillas in Central America, 
and even extended humanitarian aid to Cambodia. It was a remarkable 
tribute to American cohesion that, a little more than five years after the 
debacle in Indochina, a determined president should again be contesting 
Soviet expansion around the world, this time successfully. 

Most of the Soviet gains of the 1970s were reversed — though several 
of these retreats did not take place until the Bush Administration. The 
Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia was ended in 1990, elections were 
held in 1993, and refugees prepared to return home; Cuban troops with- 
drew from Angola by 1991; the communist-backed government in Ethio- 


773 



Diplomacy 


pia collapsed in 1991; in 1990, the Sandinistas in Nicaragua were brought 
to accept free elections, a risk no governing Communist Party had ever 
before been prepared to take; perhaps most important, Soviet armies 
withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989. All of these developments contrib- 
uted to a decline in communist ideological elan and geopolitical convic- 
tion. Observing the collapse of Soviet influence in the so-called Third 
World, Soviet reformers were soon citing Brezhnev’s costly and futile 
adventures as proof of the bankruptcy of the communist system, whose 
undemocratic style of decision-making they believed to be in urgent need 
of revision. 17 

The Reagan Administration achieved these successes by putting into 
practice what became known as the Reagan Doctrine: that the United 
States would help anticommunist counterinsurgencies wrest their respec- 
tive countries out of the Soviet sphere of influence. This meant arming 
the Afghan mujahideen in their struggle with the Russians, supporting the 
contras in Nicaragua, and aiding anticommunist forces in Ethiopia and 
Angola. Through the 1960s and 1970s, the Soviets had abetted communist 
insurgencies against governments that were friendly toward the United 
States. Now, in the 1980s, America was giving the Soviets a taste of their 
own medicine. Secretary of State George Shultz explained the concept at 
a February 1985 speech in San Francisco: 

For many years we saw our adversaries act without restraint to back 
insurgencies around the world to spread communist dictatorships . . . 
any victory of communism was held to be irreversible Today, how- 

ever, the Soviet empire is weakening under the strain of its own inter- 
nal problems and external entanglements. . . . The forces of democracy 
around the world merit our standing with them. To abandon them 
would be a shameful betrayal — a betrayal not only of brave men and 
women but of our highest ideals. 18 


The high-flying Wilsonian language in support of freedom and democracy 
globally was leavened by an almost Machiavellian realism. America did 
not go “abroad in search of monsters to destroy,” in John Quincy Adams’ 
memorable phrase; rather, the Reagan Doctrine amounted to a strategy 
for helping the enemy of one’s enemy — of which Richelieu would have 
heartily approved. The Reagan Administration dispensed aid not only to 
genuine democrats (as in Poland), but also to Islamic fundamentalists (in 
cahoots with the Iranians) in Afghanistan, to rightists in Central America, 
and to tribal warlords in Africa. The United States had no more in com- 
mon with the mujahideen than Richelieu had had with the Sultan of the 


774 



The End of the Cold War 


Ottoman Empire. Yet they shared a common enemy, and in the world of 
national interest, that made them allies. The results helped to speed the 
collapse of communism but left America face-to-face with the tormenting 
question it has tried to avoid through most of its history, which happens 
to be the statesman’s central dilemma: what ends justify which means? 

Reagan’s most fundamental challenge to the Soviet Union proved to be 
his military buildup. In all his electoral campaigns, Reagan had deplored 
the inadequacy of the American defense effort, and had warned of ap- 
proaching Soviet superiority. Today we know that these fears reflected an 
oversimplification of the nature of military superiority in the Nuclear Age. 
But, whatever the accuracy of Reagan’s perception of the Soviet military 
threat, it managed to rally his conservative constituency far more than 
Nixon’s evocations of the geopolitical perils. 

Prior to the Reagan Administration, a standard argument of the radical 
critique of American Cold War policy had been that arms buildups 
were pointless because the Soviets would always, and at every level, 
match the American effort. That turned out to be even more inaccu- 
rate than the perception of imminent Soviet superiority. The scale and 
pace of the American buildup under Reagan reinforced all the doubts 
already in the minds of the Soviet leadership as a result of debacles in 
Afghanistan and Africa, about whether they could afford the arms race 
economically and — even more important — whether they could sustain it 
technologically. 

Reagan restored weapons systems which had been abandoned by the 
Carter Administration, such as the B-l bomber, and began deployment of 
the MX missile, the first new American land-based intercontinental missile 
in a decade. The two strategic decisions which contributed most to end- 
ing the Cold War were NATO’s deployment of American intermediate- 
range missiles in Europe and the American commitment to the Strategic 
Defense Initiative (SDI). 

The NATO decision to deploy intermediate-range missiles (of 1,500- 
mile range) in Europe dated from the Carter Administration. Its purpose 
was to assuage West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt’s outrage at 
the unilateral American cancellation of the so-called neutron bomb — 
designed to make nuclear war less destructive — which Schmidt had sup- 
ported over the opposition of his own Social Democratic Party. The inter- 
mediate-range weapons (partly ballistic missiles, partly ground-launched 
cruise missiles) were in fact designed for a different problem — to 
counter the large number of new Soviet missiles (the SS-20s) that were 
capable of reaching all European targets from deep within Soviet terri- 
tory. 


775 



Diplomacy 


In its essence, the argument in favor of the intermediate-range weapons 
was political, not strategic, and it stemmed from the same concerns which 
twenty years earlier had generated allied debates about strategy; this time, 
however, America tried to allay Europe’s fears. Bluntly put, once again 
the issue was whether Western Europe could count on the United States’ 
using its nuclear weapons to repel a Soviet attack that was confined 
to Europe. Had America’s European allies truly believed in America’s 
willingness to resort to nuclear retaliation from the continental United 
States or from weapons based at sea, the new missiles on European 
soil would have been unnecessary. But America’s resolve to do that was 
precisely what European leaders continued to doubt. For their part, 
American leaders had their own reasons for responding to European 
anxieties. It was part of the flexible response strategy to bring about 
options between all-out war focused on America and acceding to Soviet 
nuclear blackmail. 

There was, of course, a more sophisticated explanation than a sublimi- 
nal mutual distrust between the two sides of the Atlantic partnership. And 
that was that the new weapons organically linked the strategic defense of 
Europe with that of the United States. The argument went that the Soviet 
Union would not attack with conventional forces without first seeking to 
destroy the intermediate-range missiles in Europe which, because of their 
proximity and accuracy, could knock out Soviet command centers and 
ease the way for a devastating first strike by American strategic forces. On 
the other hand, attacking American intermediate-range missiles while 
leaving America’s retaliatory force intact would be too risky as well. 
Enough intermediate-range missiles might survive to do serious damage, 
enabling the undamaged American retaliatory force to emerge as the 
arbiter of events. Thus the intermediate-range missiles closed a gap in 
the spectrum of deterrence. In the technical jargon of the times, the 
defenses of Europe and of the United States would be thereby “coupled”: 
the Soviet Union would not be able to attack either area without incurring 
an unacceptable risk of a general nuclear war. 

Technical “coupling” responded as well to a growing fear of German 
neutralism in the rest of Europe, especially in France. After the overthrow 
of Schmidt in 1982, the German Social Democratic Party seemed to be 
returning to nationalism and neutralism — to the point that, in the 1986 
elections, one of its leaders, Oscar LaFontaine, urged that Germany leave 
the integrated NATO command. Massive demonstrations against missile 
deployment rocked the Federal Republic. 

Sensing an opportunity to weaken Germany’s ties to NATO, Brezhnev 
and his successor, Andropov, made opposition to the deployment of 
intermediate-range missiles the linchpin of Soviet foreign policy. In early 


776 



The End of the Cold War 


1983, Gromyko visited Bonn to warn that the Soviets would walk out of 
the Geneva arms control talks the day the Pershings arrived in West 
Germany, a threat certain to inflame the German protesters. When Kohl 
visited the Kremlin in July 1983, Andropov warned the German Chancel- 
lor that, if he accepted the Pershing IIs, 

[t]he military threat for West Germany will grow manifold. Relations 
between our two countries will be bound to suffer certain complica- 
tions as well. As for the Germans in the Federal Republic of Germany 
and the German Democratic Republic, they would have, as someone 
[Pravda] recently put it, to look at one another through thick palisades 
of missiles . 19 

Moscow’s propaganda machinery unleashed a major campaign in every 
European country. Mass demonstrations by various peace groups urged 
that disarmament rather than the new missile deployment be given prior- 
ity and that a nuclear freeze be instituted immediately. 

Whenever Germany seemed tempted by neutralism, which, in the 
French mind, spelled nationalism, French presidents attempted to pro- 
vide Bonn with a European or Atlantic alternative. In the 1960s, de Gaulle 
had been a staunch defender of the German point of view on Berlin. In 
1983, Mitterrand emerged unexpectedly as the chief European supporter 
of the American plan to deploy intermediate-range missiles. Mitterrand 
campaigned for the missiles in Germany. “Anyone gambling on uncou- 
pling the European continent from the American would, in our view, 
jeopardize the balance of forces and therefore the maintenance of peace,” 
Mitterrand told the German Bundestag. 20 Clearly, for the French Presi- 
dent, France’s national interest in seeing the intermediate-range missiles 
in Germany transcended any ideological affinity his French Socialists 
might feel for their German Social Democratic brethren. 

Reagan came up with a ploy of his own to blunt the Soviet diplomatic 
offensive, offering to trade American intermediate-range missiles for the 
Soviet SS-20s. 21 Since the SS-20s were more of a pretext for the American 
deployment than its cause, the proposal raised grave questions about 
“decoupling” the defense of Europe from that of the United States. How- 
ever, while the arguments for “coupling” were esoteric, the proposal to 
abolish an entire category of weapons was easy to understand. And since 
the Soviets overestimated their bargaining position and refused to discuss 
any part of Reagan’s offer, the so-called zero option made it easier for 
European governments to go through with the missile deployment. It was 
a stunning victory for Reagan and for German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, 
who had staunchly stood by the American plan. And it showed that the 


777 



Diplomacy 


infirm Soviet leadership was losing its capacity to intimidate Western 
Europe. 

The deployment of intermediate-range missiles improved deterrent 
strategy; but when, on March 23, 1983, Reagan announced his intention 
to develop a strategic defense against Soviet missiles, he was threatening 
a strategic breakthrough: 

... I call upon the scientific community in our country, those who gave 
us nuclear weapons, to turn their great talents now to the cause of 
mankind and world peace: to give us the means of rendering these 
nuclear weapons impotent and obsolete. 22 

Those last words, “impotent and obsolete,” must have had a chilling ring 
in the Kremlin. The Soviet nuclear arsenal was the keystone of the Soviet 
Union’s entire superpower status. For the twenty years of Brezhnev’s 
tenure, achieving strategic parity with the United States had been the 
principal Soviet objective. Now, with a single technological stroke, Reagan 
was proposing to erase everything that the Soviet Union had propelled 
itself into bankruptcy trying to accomplish. 

If Reagan’s claim of a 100 percent effective defense came even close to 
realization, American strategic superiority would become a reality. An 
American first strike might then succeed because the defensive system 
might be able to contain the relatively small and disorganized Soviet 
missile force which had survived. At a minimum, Reagan’s proclamation 
of SDI put the Soviet leadership on notice that the arms race they had 
started so recklessly in the 1960s would either consume their resources 
or lead to an American strategic breakthrough. 

Reagan’s SDI proposal touched a sore spot in the debate about Ameri- 
can defense policy. Before the Nuclear Age, it would have been consid- 
ered preposterous to base a country’s defense on the vulnerability of 
its population. Afterward, the strategic debate assumed a novel character, 
in part because so much of it was conducted by an entirely new group 
of participants. Before the Nuclear Age, military strategy was thrashed 
out within general staffs or at military staff colleges with a few outside 
kibitzers, mostly military historians like B. H. Liddell Hart. The vast 
destructiveness of nuclear weapons made traditional military expertise 
less relevant; anybody who understood the new technology could play, 
and the players were, in the main, scientists, joined by a few other 
academicians. 

Appalled by the destructiveness they had unleashed, the majority of 
technical experts convinced themselves that politicians were sufficiently 


778 



The End of the Cold War 


irresponsible that, if they perceived even a minimal chance of making 
nuclear war tolerable, they might be tempted to unleash it. Therefore, it 
was the moral duty of scientists to advocate strategies so catastrophic as 
to scare even the most reckless policymaker. The paradox of that ap- 
proach was that those who, quite rightly, considered themselves as most 
concerned about the future of civilization ended up advocating a nihilistic 
military strategy of civilian extermination. 

Defense scientists had come to this view only gradually. During the 
first decade of the Nuclear Age, many of them had still been urging 
defense against an as yet largely nonexistent Soviet air threat. Deeply 
committed to preventing nuclear war, the scientists no doubt had in the 
back of their minds the utility of diverting resources from offensive weap- 
ons and thereby reducing the incentives for an American pre-emptive 
attack. After the emergence of an ever-growing Soviet nuclear capability 
with enough power to devastate the United States, the scientific commu- 
nity’s prevailing advice paradoxically changed. Henceforth, the majority 
passionately advocated the doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction, which 
based deterrence on the assumption that, given a high enough level of 
expected civilian casualties, neither side would start a nuclear war. 

The theory of Mutual Assured Destruction marked a deliberate flight 
from rationality in strategic theory by basing defense on the threat of 
suicide. In practice, it conferred a vast advantage, certainly psychologi- 
cally, on the side capable of posing challenges from which its adversary 
could only extricate itself by resorting to general nuclear war. In the 
1960s and 1970s, this side had clearly been the Soviet Union, whose 
conventional military forces were generally assumed to be far superior 
to those of the West. At the same time, such a strategy guaranteed that 
nuclear war would destroy civilization itself. Thus, SDI found adherents 
especially among those who sought to avoid the intolerable choice be- 
tween surrender and Armageddon. 

The majority of the media and defense intellectuals, however, stuck to 
the generally accepted wisdom and opposed SDI. The best and fairest 
compendium of the various reservations was found in a book edited by 
Harold Brown, who had served as Secretary of Defense in the Carter 
Administration and as Secretary of the Air Force in the Johnson Adminis- 
tration. 23 Brown favored a research effort but argued that SDI was not yet 
practical. 24 One of his collaborators, Richard Betts, took the position that, 
at any level of deployment, the Soviets would find it possible to saturate 
the defense system, and at a lower cost than that of the American deploy- 
ment. 25 Johns Hopkins Professor George Liska took the opposite tack. He 
assumed that SDI might work but that, once protected, America would 


779 



Diplomacy 


lack incentive to defend its European allies. 26 Robert Osgood combined 
all of the above criticism with a concern about undermining the 1972 
ABM Treaty and complicating new arms control efforts. 27 Representing 
the view of many Western allies, British Foreign Secretary Geoffrey Howe 
warned against trying to create a “Maginot Line in space” 

Many years of deployment may be involved. Many years of insecurity 
and instability cannot be our objective. All the Allies must continue at 
every stage to share the same sense that the security of NATO territory 
is indivisible. Otherwise the twin pillars of the Alliance might begin to 
fall apart. 28 

It was a novel and, in the long run, demoralizing concept that the price 
of maintaining an alliance should be keeping the civilian population of 
each ally totally vulnerable. It was also fallacious. For surely America’s 
willingness to risk nuclear war on behalf of its European allies would 
increase in nearly direct proportion to America’s capacity to protect its 
civilian population. 

The experts had all the technical arguments on their side, but Reagan 
had got hold of an elemental political truth: in a world of nuclear weap- 
ons, leaders who make no effort to protect their peoples against accident, 
mad opponents, nuclear proliferation, and a whole host of other foresee- 
able dangers, invite the opprobrium of posterity if disaster ever does 
occur. That it was not possible at the beginning of a complicated research 
program to demonstrate SDI’s maximum effectiveness was inherent in 
the complexity of the problem; no weapon would ever have been devel- 
oped if it first had had to submit to so perfectionist a criterion. 

The fashionable argument — that any defense could be defeated by 
being saturated — ignored the fact that saturation does not work in a 
straight line. Up to a certain level, SDI might work almost as Reagan 
described it; after that, it would progressively decline in effectiveness. But 
if the price of launching a nuclear attack were high enough, deterrence 
would increase, especially since the attacker could not know which war- 
heads would get through or to what targets. Finally, a defense capable of 
intercepting a substantial number of Soviet missiles would be even more 
effective against the much smaller attacks of new nuclear countries. 

Reagan was impervious to much of the technical criticism because he 
had not advocated SDI in strategic terms in the first place. Instead, he had 
presented it in terms of the “liberal” cause of bringing about the abolition 
of nuclear war. The postwar president most committed to building up 
America’s military strength, including its nuclear capacity, stood at the 


780 



The End of the Cold War 


same time for a pacifist vision of a world from which all nuclear weapons 
were banished. Reagan’s overused epigram that “a nuclear war can never 
be won and must never be fought” 29 was indistinguishable from the 
stated objectives of his radical critics. Yet, just as in the duality of his 
approach to dealing with the Soviet Union, Reagan was deadly serious 
about both his arms buildup and his pacifism. Reagan described his atti- 
tude toward nuclear weapons in his memoirs: 

No one could “win” a nuclear war. Yet as long as nuclear weapons 
were in existence, there would always be risks they would be used, and 
once the first nuclear weapon was unleashed, who knew where it 
would end? 

My dream, then, became a world free of nuclear weapons 30 

Reagan’s personal abhorrence of nuclear war was reinforced by a highly 
literal belief in the biblical prophecy of Armageddon. I heard him ex- 
pound these views along lines nearly identical to what his biographer has 
described: 

Speaking as if he were describing a movie scene, he related a terrifying 
episode in the Armageddon story where an invading army from the 
Orient, 200-million strong, is destroyed by a plague. Reagan believes 
that the “plague” was a prophecy of nuclear war, where “the eyes are 
burned from the head and the hair falls from the body and so forth.” 

He believes this passage specifically foretold Hiroshima. 31 

No member of the Peace Movement could have condemned the use of 
nuclear weapons more eloquently than Ronald Reagan. On May 16, 1983, 
he coupled an announcement that he was deploying the MX interconti- 
nental missiles with the expression of his fervent hope that, somewhere 
along the line, the process would be reversed and that all nuclear weap- 
ons would be eliminated: 

I can’t believe that this world can go on beyond our generation and on 
down to succeeding generations with this kind of weapon on both sides 
poised at each other without someday some fool or some maniac or 
some accident triggering the kind of war that is the end of the line for 
all of us. 32 

When Reagan put forward SDI, it was in language as passionate as it was 
unorthodox, even after it had been filtered through the bureaucratic 
“clearing process” to which all presidents are subject. In the event that 


781 



Diplomacy 


negotiations on arms control went on too long, America would unilater- 
ally end the nuclear peril by building SDI. American science, Reagan 
believed, would render nuclear weapons obsolete. 33 

Soviet leaders were not impressed by Reagan’s moral appeals, but they 
were obliged to take seriously America’s technological potential and the 
strategic impact of even an imperfect defense. As had happened with 
Nixon’s ABM proposals fourteen years earlier, the Soviet reaction was the 
opposite of what the arms control advocates had predicted; SDI served to 
unlock the door to arms control. The Soviets returned to the arms control 
talks they had broken off over the intermediate-range-missile issue. 

Critics alleged that Reagan was being cynical and that his sweeping 
vista of the elimination of all nuclear weapons was a cover for his efforts 
to spur the arms race. Reagan, however, was anything but cynical, giving 
expression to the optimistic faith of all Americans that that which is neces- 
sary is also attainable. Indeed, all his most eloquent statements on abol- 
ishing nuclear weapons were uttered extemporaneously. 

Thus came about the paradox that the president who did so much to 
modernize America’s strategic arsenal also contributed in a major way to 
delegitimizing it. Adversaries or allies who took literally what Reagan was 
saying publicly about nuclear weapons and privately about the immi- 
nence of Armageddon could only conclude that they were dealing with a 
president who was extremely unlikely to resort to the very weapons 
around which American defense had been built. 

How often could a president repeat his standard line that “nuclear war 
must never be fought” before the credibility of the nuclear threat became 
eroded? How many reductions of nuclear weapons could be undertaken 
before the strategy of flexible response became technically unfeasible? 
Fortunately, the Soviets had by this time grown too weak to test this 
potential vulnerability, and America’s worried allies were swept along by 
the accelerating decline of the Soviet Union. 

That Reagan was anything but cynical became evident whenever he 
thought he saw an opportunity to implement his dream of a non-nuclear 
world. Convinced that the abolition of nuclear war was objectively of such 
overriding importance that all reasonable persons would agree with him, 
Reagan was quite prepared to proceed bilaterally with the Soviets on 
the most fundamental matters without consulting allies whose national 
interests might be equally involved. This happened most dramatically at 
Reagan’s 1986 summit meeting with Gorbachev at Reykjavik. In a tumultu- 
ous and emotional roller-coaster ride lasting forty-eight hours, Reagan 
and Gorbachev agreed in principle to reduce all strategic forces by 50 
percent within five years, and to destroy all ballistic missiles within ten 


782 



The End of the Cold War 


years. At one point, Reagan came close to accepting a Soviet offer to 
abolish nuclear weapons altogether. 

In this way, Reykjavik approached the Soviet-American condominium 
which allies and neutrals alike had feared for so long. If the other nuclear 
powers refused to go along with the Soviet-American agreement, they 
would suffer public opprobrium, superpower pressure, or isolation; if 
they agreed, Great Britain, France, and China would in effect have been 
obliged by the United States and the Soviet Union to abandon their inde- 
pendent nuclear deterrent, something the incumbent Thatcher and Mit- 
terrand governments and China’s leaders were not even remotely 
prepared to do. 

The Reykjavik deal failed at the last moment for two reasons. At that 
still-early stage of his rule, Gorbachev simply overplayed his hand. He 
tried to link abolishing strategic missiles to a ban on SDI testing for a 
ten-year period but misjudged his interlocutor as well as his bargaining 
position. A wise tactic for Gorbachev would have been to propose pub- 
lishing what had been agreed — namely the abolition of missile forces — 
and to refer the issue of SDI testing to the arms control negotiators in 
Geneva. This would have frozen what had already been agreed, and 
would have surely produced a major crisis, both in the Atlantic Alliance 
and in Sino-American relations. By pressing for more, Gorbachev came 
up against a promise Reagan had made before the summit — not to use 
SDI as a bargaining chip. When Gorbachev persisted, Reagan responded 
in a way no foreign policy professional would have advised: he simply 
got up and left the room. Years later, when I asked a senior Gorbachev 
adviser who had been present at Reykjavik why the Soviets had not settled 
for what the United States had already accepted, he replied: “We had 
thought of everything except that Reagan might leave the room.” 

Shortly afterward, George Shultz gave a thoughtful speech describing 
why Reagan’s vision of eliminating nuclear weapons was actually to the 
West’s advantage. 34 But the language of his speech, artfully phrased in 
support of a “less nuclear world,” showed that the State Department — 
painfully conscious of allied concerns — had not yet signed on to Reagan’s 
vision of the total abolition of nuclear weapons. 

After Reykjavik, the Reagan Administration pursued that part of the 
Reykjavik agenda that was immediately realizable: the 50 percent reduc- 
tion in strategic forces, which had been envisioned as the first stage of an 
overall agreement banning all missiles. Agreements were reached to de- 
stroy American and Soviet intermediate- and medium-range ballistic mis- 
siles in Europe. Because this agreement did not affect the nuclear forces 
of Great Britain and France, the interallied disputes of twenty-five years 


783 



Diplomacy 


earlier did not break out again. By the same token, the process of denu- 
clearizing Germany was started, and, therefore, its potential decoupling 
from the Atlantic Alliance. Germany would draw the full benefit from its 
incipient denuclearization only by adopting a policy of no first use of 
nuclear weapons — quite inconsistent with NATO strategy and American 
deployments. Had the Cold War continued, a more national, less alliance- 
oriented foreign policy in the Federal Republic might well have resulted, 
which was why British Prime Minister Thatcher was so worried about the 
emerging trend in arms control negotiations. 

Reagan had transformed what had been a marathon race into a sprint. 
His confrontational style linked to a risk-taking diplomacy would proba- 
bly have worked at the beginning of the Cold War, before the two spheres 
of interest had been consolidated, and immediately after the death of 
Stalin. Such a diplomacy was essentially what Churchill had proposed 
when he returned to office in 1951. Once the division of Europe was 
frozen and so long as the Soviet Union still felt confident, the attempt to 
force a settlement would have almost certainly produced a major clash 
and strained the Atlantic Alliance, the majority of whose members wanted 
no unnecessary tension. In the 1980s, Soviet stagnation made a forward 
strategy appropriate again. Did Reagan recognize the degree of disinte- 
gration of Soviet willpower, or did self-will and opportunity coincide? 

In the end, it made no difference whether Reagan was acting on instinct 
or on analysis. The Cold War did not continue, at least in part because of 
the pressures the Reagan Administration had exerted on the Soviet sys- 
tem. By the end of Reagan’s presidency, the East-West agenda had re- 
turned to the pattern of the detente period. Once again, arms control was 
the centerpiece of East-West negotiations, though with more emphasis on 
arms reduction and a greater willingness to eliminate entire categories of 
weapons. In the regional conflicts, the Soviet Union was now on the 
defensive and had lost much of its ability to instigate trouble. With secu- 
rity concerns declining, nationalism grew on both sides of the Atlantic 
even as allied unity continued to be proclaimed. America relied more 
and more on weapons stationed on its own territory or at sea, while 
Europe multiplied its political options toward the East. In the end, these 
negative trends were superseded by the collapse of communism. 

What had changed most radically was the way East-West policy was 
being presented to the American public. Reagan had instinctively sand- 
wiched tough Cold War geostrategic policies between an ideological cru- 
sade and a utopian evocation of peace that appealed simultaneously to 
the two major strands of American thought on international affairs — the 
missionary and the isolationist, the theological and the psychiatric. 


784 



The End of the Cold War 


In practice, Reagan was closer to classical patterns of American thinking 
than Nixon had been. Nixon would not have used the phrase “evil em- 
pire” to describe the Soviet Union, but he also would not have offered to 
give up all nuclear weapons, or expected to end the Cold War in one 
grand personal reconciliation with Soviet leaders at a single summit. 
Reagan’s ideology shielded him whenever he made semi-pacifist pro- 
nouncements for which a liberal president would have been vilified. And 
his commitment to improving East- West relations, especially in his second 
term, together with his successes took the edge off his belligerent rheto- 
ric. Whether Reagan could have sustained this tightrope act indefinitely 
had the Soviet Union remained a major competitor is doubtful. But 
Reagan’s second term coincided with the beginning of the disintegration 
of the communist system — a process hastened by his Administration’s 
policies. 


Mikhail Gorbachev, the seventh in a direct line from Lenin, had been 
raised in a Soviet Union that enjoyed unprecedented power and prestige. 
Yet he was destined to preside over the demise of the empire built with 
so much blood and treasure. When Gorbachev assumed office in 1985, 
he was the leader of a nuclear superpower which was in a state of eco- 
nomic and social decay. When he was toppled from power in 1991, the 
Soviet army had thrown its support behind his rival, Boris Yeltsin, the 
Communist Party had been declared illegal, and the empire which had 
been so bloodily assembled by every Russian ruler since Peter the Great 
had disintegrated. 

This collapse would have seemed fantastic in March 1985, when Gorba- 
chev was anointed General Secretary. As had been the case with all of his 
predecessors, Gorbachev inspired both fear and hope. Fear, as the leader 
of a superpower all the more ominous for its enigmatic style of govern- 
ment; hope that the new General Secretary might usher in the long- 
awaited turn to peace. Gorbachev’s every word was analyzed for a sign of 
an easing of the tension; emotionally, the democracies were amply ready 
to discover in Gorbachev the dawn of a new era, just as they had been 
with all of his predecessors after Stalin. 

For once, the democracies’ faith turned out not to be so much wishful 
thinking. Gorbachev was of a different generation than the Soviet leaders 
whose spirit had been broken by Stalin. He lacked the heavy-handedness 
of all previous products of the nomenklatura. Highly intelligent and 
suave, he was like the somewhat abstract figures from the nineteenth- 
century Russian novels — both cosmopolitan and provincial, intelligent 


785 



Diplomacy 


yet somehow unfocused; perceptive while missing his central dilemma. 

The outside world heaved a nearly audible sigh of relief. Here at last 
seemed to be the long-awaited and heretofore utterly elusive moment of 
the Soviets’ ideological transformation. Until well into 1991, Gorbachev 
was considered in Washington to be an indispensable partner in the 
building of a new world order — to such an extent that President Bush 
chose the Ukrainian Parliament as the unlikely venue for a forum in 
which to extol the Soviet leader’s qualities and the importance of keeping 
the Soviet Union together. Keeping Gorbachev in office turned into a 
principal objective of Western policymakers, who were convinced that 
any other figure would be far more difficult to deal with. During the 
strange, apparently anti-Gorbachev coup of August 1991, all the demo- 
cratic leaders rallied to the side of “legality” in supporting the communist 
constitution which had put Gorbachev into office. 

But high politics makes no allowances for weakness — even if the victim 
is not the principal cause of it. Gorbachev’s mystique was at its height 
when he appeared in the guise of the conciliatory leader of an ideologi- 
cally hostile, nuclear-armed Soviet Union. As his policy began to reflect 
confusion rather than purpose, Gorbachev’s standing began to decline. 
Five months after the failed communist coup, he was induced to resign 
and replaced by Yeltsin through procedures every bit as “illegal” as those 
which had evoked Western wrath only five months earlier. This time, the 
democracies quickly rallied to Yeltsin with many of the same arguments 
they had invoked a short time earlier on behalf of Gorbachev. Ignored 
by an outside world which had so recently celebrated him, Gorbachev 
wandered into the limbo reserved for statesmen shipwrecked by striving 
for goals beyond their capabilities. 

Gorbachev had in fact wrought one of the most significant revolutions 
of his time. He destroyed the Communist Party, which had been orga- 
nized for the specific purpose of seizing and holding power, and which 
had in fact controlled every aspect of Soviet life. In its wake, Gorbachev 
left the shattered remnants of an empire which had been painstakingly 
assembled over centuries. Organized as independent states yet fearful of 
Russia’s nostalgia for the old empire, these have turned into new ele- 
ments of instability, threatened simultaneously by their former imperial 
masters and by the residue of various outside ethnic groups — often Rus- 
sian — deposited on their soil by centuries of Russian domination. None 
of these results was even remotely what Gorbachev had intended. He had 
wanted to bring about modernization, not freedom; he had tried to make 
the Communist Party relevant to the outside world; instead, he ushered 
in the collapse of the system which had shaped him and to which he 
owed his eminence. 


786 



The End of the Cold War 


Blamed by his own people for the magnitude of the disaster which 
occurred during his incumbency, forgotten by the democracies, and em- 
barrassed by his inability to sustain his power, Gorbachev has deserved 
neither the exaltation nor the ignominy which have alternatively been his 
lot. For he had inherited a truly difficult, perhaps insurmountable, set of 
problems. When Gorbachev assumed power, the scale of the Soviet deba- 
cle was just becoming apparent. Forty years of Cold War had forged a 
loose coalition of nearly all the industrial countries against the Soviet 
Union. Its erstwhile ally, China, had for all practical purposes joined the 
opposing camp. The Soviet Union’s only remaining allies were the East 
European satellites, which were held together by the threat of Soviet 
force implicit in the Brezhnev Doctrine, and which represented a drain, 
not an augmentation, of Soviet resources. Soviet adventures in the Third 
World were turning out to be both expensive and inconclusive. In Afghan- 
istan, the Soviet Union experienced many of the same trials America 
had undergone in Vietnam, the major difference being that these were 
occurring at the very borders of its own far-flung empire, not at some 
distant outpost. From Angola to Nicaragua, a resurgent America was turn- 
ing Soviet expansionism into costly stalemates or discredited failures, 
while the American strategic buildup, especially SDI, posed a technologi- 
cal challenge which the stagnant and overburdened Soviet economy 
could not begin to meet. At a moment when the West was launching the 
supercomputer-microchip revolution, the new Soviet leader watched his 
country slip into technological underdevelopment. 

Despite his ultimate debacle, Gorbachev deserves credit for being will- 
ing to face the Soviet Union’s dilemmas. At first, he seems to have believed 
that he could revitalize his society by purging the Communist Party and by 
introducing some elements of market economics into central planning. 
Although Gorbachev had no idea of the magnitude of what he was taking 
on domestically, he understood quite clearly that he needed a period of 
international calm to pursue it. In this respect, Gorbachev’s conclusions 
were not so different from those of all his post- Stalin predecessors. But 
whereas, in the 1950s, Khrushchev had still been convinced that the 
Soviet economy would soon overtake the capitalist system, Gorbachev, in 
the 1980s, had learned that it would take a long time for the Soviet Union 
to achieve any level of industrial output that could, even remotely, be 
considered competitive with the capitalist world. 

To gain this breathing space, Gorbachev initiated a major reassessment 
of Soviet foreign policy. At the Twenty-seventh Party Congress in 1986, 
Marxist-Leninist ideology was nearly completely jettisoned. Previous peri- 
ods of peaceful coexistence had been justified as temporary respites in 
which to rearrange the balance of forces while the class struggle contin- 


787 



Diplomacy 


ued. Gorbachev was the first Soviet leader to repudiate the class struggle 
altogether, and to proclaim coexistence as an end in itself. Though contin- 
uing to affirm the ideological differences between East and West, Gorba- 
chev insisted that they were superseded by the need for international 
cooperation. Coexistence, moreover, was not conceived in the same way 
that it had been previously — as an interlude before an inevitable confron- 
tation — but as a permanent component of the relationship between the 
communist and the capitalist worlds. It was justified not as a necessary 
stage on the road to an eventual communist victory, but as contributing 
to the well-being of all humanity. 

In his book Perestroika — which means “reform” — Gorbachev de- 
scribed the new approach: 

To be sure, distinctions will remain. But should we duel because of 
them? Would it not be more correct to step over the things that divide 
us for the sake of the interests of all mankind, for the sake of life on 
Earth? We have made our choice, asserting a new political outlook both 
by binding statements and by specific actions and deeds. People are 
tired of tension and confrontation. They prefer a search for a more 
secure and reliable world, a world in which everyone would preserve 
their own philosophic, political and ideological views and their way of 
life.” 


Gorbachev had already hinted at these views two years earlier, during a 
press conference at the end of his first summit meeting with Reagan in 
1985: 

The international situation today is distinguished by a very important 
feature which we and the United States of America must take into 
account in our foreign policy. What I mean is this. In the present 
situation we are talking not only about confrontation between the two 
social systems, but about a choice between survival and mutual annihi- 
lation. 36 

Inevitably, veterans of the Cold War had difficulty recognizing just how 
much deeper Gorbachev’s approach went than that of previous periods 
of coexistence. In early 1987, I had a meeting with Anatoly Dobrynin, 
who was then head of the International Department of the Central Com- 
mittee (more or less the equivalent of the White House National Security 
Adviser) in the cavernous Central Committee building in Moscow. Do- 
brynin made so many disparaging comments about the Afghan govern- 
ment, which Moscow was supporting, that I asked him whether the 


788 



The End of the Cold War 


Brezhnev Doctrine was still in force. Dobrynin shot back: “What makes 
you think the Kabul government is communist?” 

When I reported to Washington that this comment seemed to imply a 
Soviet readiness to jettison the Kremlin’s Afghan puppets, the general 
reaction was that Dobrynin had been carried away by his desire to please 
an old friend — a quality I had failed to note in my nearly ten years of 
experience with the Soviet end of the “back channel.” Nevertheless, the 
skepticism seemed justified because Gorbachev’s doctrinal changes in 
foreign policy were not being immediately translated into recognizable 
policy changes. By rote, Soviet leaders described their new doctrine as a 
method by which to “deprive the West of an enemy image” and thereby 
to weaken Western cohesion. The self-proclaimed “new thinking,” Gorba- 
chev declared in November 1987, “has started to make its way in world 
affairs, destroying the stereotypes of anti-Sovietism and suspicion toward 
our initiatives and actions.” 37 The Soviets’ tactics in arms control talks 
seemed a replay of their tactics of the early Nixon years — of making an 
all-out attempt to undermine defensive systems while leaving the underly- 
ing offensive threat unchanged. 

The government of a great power is like the supertankers that weigh 
hundreds of thousands of tons and have turning radiuses extending over 
dozens of miles. Its leaders must balance the impact they seek to make 
on the outside world against the morale of their bureaucracies. Heads of 
governments enjoy the formal prerogative of establishing the direction of 
policies; yet it falls to the governmental bureaucracies to interpret what 
their chiefs might have had in mind. And heads of government almost 
never have the time or the staff to supervise the daily implementation of 
their directives through every nuance of execution. Ironically, the larger 
and more complex the bureaucracy, the more this is the case. Even in 
governments less rigid than the Soviet system, policy changes frequently 
move at a glacial pace. 

As time went on, Gorbachev’s doctrinal change could no longer be 
evaded, not even by a bureaucracy shaped by the nearly thirty years of 
Gromyko’s tenure as Foreign Minister. For Gorbachev’s “new thinking” 
went far beyond adapting established Soviet policy to new realities; it 
altogether destroyed the intellectual underpinnings of historic Soviet for- 
eign policy. When Gorbachev replaced the concept of the class struggle 
with the Wilsonian theme of global interdependence, he was defining a 
world of compatible interests and underlying harmony — a complete re- 
versal of established Leninist orthodoxy and historical Marxism. 

The collapse of ideology not only deprived Soviet foreign policy of its 
historic rationale and conviction, but compounded the inherent difficulty 


789 



Diplomacy 


of the Soviets’ situation. By the mid-1980s, Soviet policymakers faced an 
agenda on which any one item would have been difficult enough to 
overcome but which, in combination, proved insuperable. These were: 
relations with the Western democracies; relations with China; strains in 
the satellite orbit; the arms race; and the stagnation of the domestic 
economic and political system. 

Gorbachev’s initial moves did not vary from the standard Soviet pattern 
since the death of Stalin — to seek to relax tensions through atmospherics, 
or at least by what had in the past been largely atmospherics. On Septem- 
ber 9, 1985, Time magazine published an interview with Gorbachev in 
which he put forward his notion of peaceful coexistence: 

You asked me what is the primary thing that defines Soviet-American 
relations. I think it is the immutable fact that whether we like one 
another or not, we can either survive or perish only together. The 
principal question that we must answer is whether we are at last ready 
to recognize that there is no other way to live at peace with each other 
and whether we are prepared to switch our mentality and our mode of 
acting from a warlike to a peaceful track. 38 

Gorbachev’s dilemma was that, on the one hand, his statements were 
viewed in the context of what Malenkov and Khrushchev had said thirty 
years earlier, and that, on the other, they were too vague to encourage a 
precise response. In the absence of a proposal for a political settlement, 
Gorbachev found himself enmeshed in the orthodoxy of two decades 
during which East-West diplomacy had been identified with arms control. 

Arms control had become an abstruse subject involving esoteric fine 
points that, even with the best intentions, would take years to resolve. But 
what the Soviet Union needed was immediate relief, not simply from 
tensions but from economic pressures, especially from the arms race. 
There was no hope of bringing this about through the laborious proce- 
dures of establishing agreed force levels, comparing incommensurable 
systems, negotiating elusive verification procedures, and then spending 
several years implementing them. In this manner, arms control negotia- 
tions were becoming a device for applying pressure on the rickety Soviet 
system — all the more effective because they had not been designed for 
that purpose. 

Gorbachev’s last opportunity to bring about a rapid end to the arms 
race, or at least to magnify the strains on the Alliance, passed at Reykjavik 
in 1986. But Gorbachev seems to have felt trapped, as Khrushchev was 
over Berlin a quarter of a century earlier, between his hawks and his 


790 



The End of the Cold War 


doves. He may well have understood the vulnerability of the American 
negotiating position and he almost surely had by then grasped the imper- 
atives of his own. But his military advisers probably told him that if he 
agreed to dismantle all missiles while SDI ran free, some future American 
administration might break the agreement and achieve a decisive advan- 
tage over a greatly reduced (or, in the extreme case, dismantled) Soviet 
missile force. This was technically true, but it was equally true that the 
Congress would almost certainly have refused to fund SDI if an arms 
control agreement based on the Reykjavik formula had brought about the 
elimination of all missiles. And it neglected the benefits to the Soviet 
Union of the nearly inevitable controversy which the Reykjavik plan 
would have generated between the United States and all the other nuclear 
powers. 

Posterity is always more given to assigning the blame for failure to 
individuals than to circumstances. In fact, Gorbachev’s foreign policy — 
especially on arms control — was a subtle updating of postwar Soviet 
strategy. And it was well on the way to denuclearizing Germany and 
establishing a premise for a more national German policy on two 
grounds: that America was less likely to risk nuclear war for a country 
which shrank from the risks of a nuclear strategy in its own defense, and 
that Germany might be increasingly tempted to buttress denuclearization 
with some kind of special status for itself. 

Gorbachev offered a mechanism for the weakening of the Atlantic Alli- 
ance in a speech to the Council of Europe in 1989, when he put forward 
his idea of a Common European Home — a vague structure extending 
from Vancouver to Vladivostok in which everyone would be allied with 
everyone else, diluting the meaning of alliance to the point of irrelevance. 
What Gorbachev lacked, however, was time — the principal prerequisite 
in order for his policy to mature. Only some abrupt change would have 
enabled him to reallocate his priorities. But, after Reykjavik, he was forced 
to return to the time-consuming diplomatic process of 50 percent cuts in 
strategic forces and the zero option in intermediate-range missiles, which 
would take years to complete and were irrelevant to his basic problem — 
that the arms race was draining the Soviet Union of its substance. 

By December 1988, Gorbachev had given up on the long-term gains 
almost within his grasp and retreated to making unilateral reductions in 
the Soviet armed forces. In a seminal speech at the United Nations on 
December 7, he announced unilateral cuts of 500,000 men and 10,000 
tanks, including half of the tanks facing NATO. The rest of the forces 
stationed in Central Europe would be reorganized for purely defensive 
missions. Seeking to tranquilize China, Gorbachev also announced the 


791 



Diplomacy 


withdrawal of the “major portion” of Soviet forces in Mongolia. The 
cuts were explicitly stated to be “unilateral,” although Gorbachev added 
somewhat plaintively: “We do hope that the United States and the Europe- 
ans will also take some steps.” 39 

Gorbachev’s spokesman, Gennadi Gerasimov, explained the rationale: 
“We are finally doing away with that endlessly repeated myth of the Soviet 
threat, the Warsaw Pact threat, of an attack on Europe.” 40 But unilateral 
cuts of such magnitude signal either extraordinary self-confidence or 
exceptional weakness. At that point of its evolution, self-confidence was 
hardly a Soviet attribute. Such a gesture, inconceivable at any time in the 
previous fifty years, was also the ultimate vindication of the original ver- 
sion of Kennan’s containment theory; America had built positions of 
strength and the Soviet Union was crumbling from within. 

Statesmen need luck as much as they need good judgment. And fortune 
simply would not smile on Mikhail Gorbachev. On the very day of his 
dramatic U.N. speech, he had to break off his American visit and return 
to the Soviet Union. A devastating earthquake had struck Armenia, stealing 
the headlines from his dramatic abandonment of the arms race. 

On the Chinese front, no arms control negotiations took place, nor did 
Beijing have any interest in them. The Chinese conducted old-fashioned 
diplomacy and identified a relaxation of tensions with some kind of politi- 
cal settlement. Gorbachev began his overture to Beijing by offering nego- 
tiations about improving relations. “I would like to affirm,” he said in a 
speech in Vladivostok in June 1986, “that the Soviet Union is prepared — 
any time, at any level — to discuss with China questions of additional 
measures for creating an atmosphere of good-neighborliness. We hope 
that the border dividing — I would prefer to say, linking — us will soon 
become a line of peace and friendship.” 41 

But there was no “psychiatric” school of diplomacy in Beijing prepared 
to settle for a change in tone. The Chinese leaders put forward three 
conditions for an improvement in relations: an end to the Vietnamese 
occupation of Cambodia; Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan; and the 
withdrawal of Soviet troops from the Sino-Soviet border. These demands 
could not be met quickly. They required first acceptance by the Soviet 
leadership and then a prolonged period of negotiations before they could 
be implemented. It took Gorbachev the better part of three years to make 
enough progress on each of the Chinese conditions to induce the tough 
bargainers in Beijing to invite him there to discuss an overall improve- 
ment of relations. 

Once again, Gorbachev was dogged by bad fortune. When he arrived 
in Beijing in May 1989, the student demonstrations in Tiananmen Square 


792 



The End of the Cold War 


were in full swing; his welcoming ceremony was interrupted by protests 
against his hosts. Protesters’ shouts could be overheard later in the negoti- 
ating room of the Great Hall of the People. The world’s attention was 
focused not on Beijing’s relations with Moscow, but on the drama of the 
Chinese leadership struggling to hold on to power. The pace of events 
had once again outstripped Gorbachev’s scope for accommodation. 

Whatever problem he tackled, Gorbachev faced the same dilemma. He 
had come into office confronted by a restive Poland in which, since 
1980, Solidarity had become an ever more potent factor. Suppressed by 
General Jaruzelski in 1981, Solidarity had re-emerged as a political force, 
which Jaruzelski could not ignore. In Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and East 
Germany, the Communist Parties’ predominance was challenged by 
groups demanding more freedom and invoking Basket III of the Helsinki 
Accords on human rights. And periodic review meetings of the European 
Security Conference kept the issue alive. 

The communist rulers of Eastern Europe found themselves in an ulti- 
mately insoluble quandary. To stanch their domestic pressures, they 
needed to pursue a more national policy, which in turn forced them to 
assert their independence from Moscow. But since they were perceived 
by their populations as tools of the Kremlin, a nationalist foreign policy 
was not enough to placate their publics. The communist leaders found 
themselves obliged to compensate for their lack of credibility by democ- 
ratizing their internal structures. It quickly became obvious that the Com- 
munist Party — even where it still controlled the media — was not 
designed for democratic contests, being an instrument for seizing power 
and holding on to it on behalf of a minority. The communists knew how 
to rule with the help of the secret police, but not with the secret ballot. 
The communist rulers of Eastern Europe were thus caught in a vicious 
circle. The more nationalist their foreign policies, the greater became the 
demands for democratization; the more they democratized, the more 
intense would be the pressures to replace them. 

The Soviet quandary was even more intractable. According to the 
Brezhnev Doctrine, the Kremlin should have quelled the incipient revolu- 
tion that was gnawing at the satellite orbit. But Gorbachev was not only 
unsuited by temperament for such a role, it also would have undermined 
his entire foreign policy. For suppression of Eastern Europe would have 
solidified NATO and the Sino-American de facto coalition, and intensified 
the arms race. Gorbachev was increasingly facing a choice between politi- 
cal suicide and the slow erosion of his political power. 

Gorbachev’s remedy was to intensify liberalization. Ten years earlier, 
that might have worked; by the late 1980s, Gorbachev could not catch up 


793 



Diplomacy 


with the power curve. His rule therefore marked a gradual retreat from 
the Brezhnev Doctrine. Liberal communists took power in Hungary; Jaru- 
zelski was permitted to deal with Solidarity in Poland. In July 1989, in a 
speech to the Council of Europe, Gorbachev seemed to abandon not only 
the Brezhnev Doctrine, stipulating the right of Soviet intervention in 
Eastern Europe, but the satellite orbit itself, by renouncing “spheres of 
influence”: 

Social and political orders in one country or another changed in the 
past and may change in the future. But this change is the exclusive affair 
of the people of that country and is their choice. . . . Any interference in 
domestic affairs and any attempts to restrict the sovereignty of states — 

friends, allies or any others — are inadmissible It is time to deposit 

in the archives the postulates of the cold war period, when Europe 
was regarded as an arena of confrontation, divided into “spheres of 
influence .” 42 

The cost of maintaining the satellite orbit had become prohibitive. Even 
the Council of Europe speech sounded too oblique — though by historic 
Soviet standards it was clear enough. In October 1989, Gorbachev, on a 
visit to Finland, abandoned the Brezhnev Doctrine unambiguously. His 
spokesman, Gerasimov, joked to the press that Moscow had adopted the 
“Sinatra Doctrine” in Eastern Europe. “You know the Frank Sinatra song, 
‘I Did It My Way’? Hungary and Poland are doing it their way.” 43 

It was too late to save the communists in Eastern Europe, or, for that 
matter, in the Soviet Union. Gorbachev’s gamble on liberalization was 
bound to fail. To the degree that the Communist Party had lost its mono- 
lithic character, it became demoralized. Liberalization proved incompati- 
ble with communist rule — the communists could not turn themselves 
into democrats without ceasing to be communists, an equation Gorba- 
chev never understood, although Yeltsin did. 

Also in October of 1989, Gorbachev visited Berlin to celebrate the 
fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the German Democratic Re- 
public and, in the process, to urge its Stalinist leader, Erich Honecker, to 
pursue a more reform-minded policy. Clearly, he would not have come 
to such a celebration had he suspected that there would never be another 
one, as was reflected in his speech on that occasion: 

We are constantly called on to liquidate this or that division. We often 
have to hear, “Let the U.S.S.R. get rid of the Berlin wall, then we’ll 
believe in its peaceful intentions.” 


794 



The End of the Cold War 


We don’t idealize the order that has settled on Europe. But the fact is 
that until now the recognition of the postwar reality has insured peace 
on the continent. Every time the West has tried to reshape the postwar 
map of Europe, it has meant a worsening of the international situation. 44 

Yet only four weeks later, the Berlin Wall came down, and within ten 
months Gorbachev had agreed to the unification of Germany as part of 
NATO. By then, every communist government in the former satellite orbit 
had been overthrown, and the Warsaw Pact had collapsed. Yalta had 
been reversed. History had exposed as nonsense Khrushchev’s boasts 
that communism would bury capitalism. The Soviet Union, which had 
exhausted itself for forty years by seeking to undermine Western cohe- 
sion by threats and pressures, was reduced to soliciting Western goodwill 
because it needed Western aid more than it needed the satellite orbit. On 
July 14, 1989, Gorbachev appealed to the G-7 summit of the heads of 
government of the industrial democracies: 

Our perestroika is inseparable from a policy aiming at our full partici- 
pation in the world economy. The world can only gain from the open- 
ing up of a market as big as the Soviet Union. 45 

Gorbachev had staked everything on two propositions: that liberalization 
would modernize the Soviet Union, and that the Soviet Union would then 
be able to hold its own internationally as a great power. Neither expecta- 
tion was fulfilled and Gorbachev’s domestic base collapsed as ignomini- 
ously as the satellite orbit had. 

The Greek philosopher and mathematician Archimedes said: “Give me 
a place to stand and I will move the world.” Revolutions consume their 
children because revolutionaries rarely understand that, after a certain 
point of social disintegration, there are no longer any fixed Archimedean 
points from which to exert leverage. Gorbachev started with the convic- 
tion that a reformed Communist Party could propel Soviet society into 
the modern world. But he could not bring himself to accept that commu- 
nism was the problem, not the solution. For two generations, the Commu- 
nist Party had suppressed independent thought and destroyed individual 
initiative. By 1990, central planning had ossified, and the various organiza- 
tions designed to keep a check on every aspect of life were instead 
concluding nonaggression treaties with the very groups they were sup- 
posedly supervising. Discipline had turned into routine, and Gorbachev’s 
attempt to liberate initiative unleashed chaos. 

Gorbachev’s difficulties began at the simplest level of attempting to 


795 



Diplomacy 


improve productivity and introducing some elements of market econom- 
ics. Almost immediately, it became apparent that there is no accountability 
in a planned system and therefore the most essential prerequisite for an 
efficient economy is lacking. Stalinist theory postulated the dominance of 
a central plan, but the reality was quite different. What was called “the 
plan” was in fact such widespread collusion among the huge bureaucra- 
cies that it amounted to a massive confidence game to mislead the central 
authorities. The managers responsible for production, the ministries 
charged with distribution, and the planners supposedly issuing directives 
were all flying blind, since they had no idea what the demand might be 
and no way of adjusting their programs once these had been established. 
As a result, each unit of the system selected only minimal targets, covering 
up any shortfalls by making private deals with the other units behind 
the back of the formal central machinery. All incentives worked against 
innovation and this state of affairs could not be corrected because the 
supposed leaders found it nearly impossible to discern the true state of 
affairs in their society. The Soviet Union had reverted to the early history 
of the Russian state; it had turned itself into a gigantic Potemkin village. 

Attempts at reform collapsed beneath the weight of the entrenched 
status quo, as had already happened to Khrushchev and later to Kosygin. 
Since at least 25 percent of the national budget went to subsidizing prices, 
no objective yardstick existed either for efficiency or for gauging eco- 
nomic demand. With goods allocated rather than purchased, corruption 
became the only expression of the market. 

Gorbachev recognized the pervasive stagnation but lacked the imagina- 
tion or skill to break through its built-in rigidities. And the various super- 
visory bodies of the system had, with the passage of time, turned into part 
of the problem. The Communist Party, once the instrument of revolution, 
had no function in an elaborated communist system other than to super- 
vise what it did not understand — a problem it solved by colluding with 
what it was allegedly controlling. The communist elite had become a 
mandarin class of the privileged; theoretically in charge of the national 
orthodoxy, it concentrated on preserving its perquisites. 

Gorbachev had based his reform program on two elements : perestroika 
— restructuring — to gain the support of the new technocrats, and glas- 
nost — political liberalization — in order to enlist the long-tormented in- 
telligentsia. But since there were no institutions for channeling free 
expression and generating genuine public debate, glasnost turned on 
itself. And since there were no free resources except those reserved for 
the military, living conditions did not improve. Thus Gorbachev gradually 
cut himself off from his institutional support without gaining broader 


796 



The End of the Cold War 


public backing. Glasnost increasingly clashed with perestroika. Even the 
attacks on previous leaders had their downside. In 1989, a young member 
of Gorbachev’s staff who had been detailed to accompany me to the 
Kremlin remarked to me: “What all this means is that every Soviet citizen 
older than twenty-five has wasted his life.” 

The only groups which understood the need for reform — without, 
however, being prepared to embrace the remedy — were the security 
services. The KGB knew from its intelligence apparatus just how far the 
Soviet Union had fallen behind in the technological competition with 
the West. The armed forces had a professional stake in determining the 
capabilities of their principal adversary. Understanding the problem did 
not, however, lead to solutions. The security services shared much of 
Gorbachev’s ambivalence. The KGB would support glasnost — political 
liberalization — only as long as this did not undermine civil discipline; 
and the military establishment felt at ease with perestroika — economic 
restructuring — only as long as Gorbachev did not attempt to squeeze 
new resources for his modernization program out of a reduction of the 
armed forces. 

Gorbachev’s first instinct, to turn the Communist Party into an instru- 
ment of reform, foundered on the rock of vested interests; his next move 
— to weaken, but still preserve, the communist structure — destroyed the 
fundamental instrument of Soviet rule. Two steps were involved: to move 
the locus of Gorbachev’s power out of the Party and into the parallel 
structure of government, and to encourage a move toward regional and 
local autonomy. 

Gorbachev miscalculated on both counts. Since Lenin, the Communist 
Party had been the sole policymaking body. The government was the 
executive organ implementing, but not designing, policy. The key Soviet 
position was always that of the general secretary of the Communist Party; 
from Lenin through Brezhnev, the communist leader rarely held a gov- 
ernmental office. The result was that the ambitious and enterprising gravi- 
tated to the communist hierarchy while the governmental structure 
attracted administrators without policy flair or even interest in designing 
policy. By shifting his base from the Communist Party to the governmental 
side of the Soviet system, Gorbachev had entrusted his revolution to an 
army of clerks. 

Gorbachev’s encouragement of regional autonomy led to similar dead- 
lock. He found it impossible to reconcile his desire to create a popular 
alternative to communism with his Leninist distrust of the popular will. 
He therefore devised a system of essentially local elections in which 
national parties — other than the Communist Party — were proscribed. But 


797 



Diplomacy 


when, for the first time in Russian history, local and regional governments 
could be popularly elected, the sins of Russian history came home to 
roost. For 300 years, Russia had been incorporating nationalities in Eu- 
rope, Asia, and in the Middle East but had failed to reconcile them to the 
ruling center. Not surprisingly, most of the newly elected non-Russian 
governments, which made up nearly half of the Soviet population, began 
to challenge their historical masters. 

Gorbachev lacked reliable constituencies. He antagonized the vast net- 
work of vested interests characteristic of the Leninist state, but failed to 
attract new supporters because he could not bring himself to advance a 
viable alternative, either to communism or to the concept of the central- 
ized state. Gorbachev had correctly identified the problems of his society, 
albeit through the blinkers of his inhuman system, thus keeping the 
solutions ever beyond his grasp. Like a man trapped in a room with 
perfectly translucent, unbreakable windows, Gorbachev could observe 
the outside world clearly enough, but was doomed by conditions within 
the room not to be able to comprehend exactly what he was seeing. 

The longer perestroika and glasnost lasted, the more isolated and less 
confident Gorbachev became. The first time I met him, in early 1987, 
he was jaunty and exuded every confidence that the tinkering he was 
undertaking would make his country fit to resume its march toward 
supremacy. A year later, he had become less certain. “At any rate,” he said, 
“the Soviet Union will never be the same again” — an oddly ambivalent 
statement about so Herculean an effort. When we met in early 1989, he 
told me how he and Shevardnadze had concluded sometime in the 1970s 
that the communist system needed to be changed from top to bottom. I 
asked how, as a communist, he had reached this conclusion. “Knowing 
what was wrong was easy,” Gorbachev remarked. “Knowing what was 
right was the hard part.” 

Gorbachev never found the answer. During his last year in power, he 
was as a man caught in a nightmare, who sees a catastrophe bearing down 
on him but is unable to turn it or himself away from the encounter. 
Usually the purpose of concessions is to create a firebreak to preserve 
something that is considered essential. Gorbachev achieved the opposite. 
Each fitful new reform amounted to a half-measure and thereby acceler- 
ated the Soviet decline. Each concession created the threshold for the 
next. By 1990, the Baltic States seceded and the Soviet Union began to 
disintegrate. In what was surely the ultimate irony, Gorbachev’s chief rival 
used the process by which the Russian Empire — acquired over three 
centuries — fell apart to overthrow Gorbachev himself. Acting in his ca- 
pacity as the President of Russia, Yeltsin affirmed the independence of 


798 



The End of the Cold War 


Russia (and therefore, by implication, of the other Soviet republics), in 
effect abolishing the Soviet Union and, with it, Gorbachev’s position as 
President of the Soviet Union. Gorbachev knew what his problems were 
but he acted both too fast and too slowly: too fast for the tolerance of his 
system, and too slowly to arrest the accelerating collapse. 

In the 1980s, both superpowers needed time to restore themselves. 
Reagan’s policies freed the energies of his society; Gorbachev’s brought 
into the open the dysfunctions of his. America’s problems were suscepti- 
ble to changes of policy; in the Soviet Union, reform brought on an 
accelerating crisis of the system. 

By 1991, the democracies had won the Cold War. But no sooner had 
they achieved far more than they had ever imagined possible than the 
original debate about the Cold War broke out all over again. Had the 
Soviet Union ever really been a threat? Would it not have gone into 
meltdown even without all the exertions of the Cold War? Had the Cold 
War been the invention of overwrought policymakers who were inter- 
rupting the underlying harmony of the international order? 

In January 1990, Time magazine made Gorbachev “Man of the Decade,” 
using the occasion to publish an article putting forth the essence of that 
thesis. “The doves in the Great Debate of the past 40 years were right all 
along,” asserted the author. 46 The Soviet Empire had never been an actual 
threat. American policy either had been irrelevant or had delayed the 
Soviet upheaval. The democracies’ policy over four decades deserved no 
significant credit, not even for changes in Soviet foreign policy. And if 
nothing had really been accomplished and events had just happened of 
their own accord, no lessons could be drawn from the collapse of the 
Soviet Empire — in particular, none that implied the need for American 
engagement in the creation of a new world order, which the end of the 
Cold War was making necessary. The American debate had come full 
circle. It was the old siren song of American isolationism — that America 
had not really won the Cold War but that the Soviet Union had lost it, and 
that four decades of effort had therefore been unnecessary because things 
would have worked out equally well — or perhaps better — had America 
left them alone. 

Another version of the same reasoning held that there had indeed been 
a Cold War and that it had really been won, but the victory belonged to 
the idea of democracy, which would have prevailed regardless of the 
geostrategic measures surrounding the East-West conflict. That too was a 
version of escapism. Political democracy and the idea of liberty no doubt 
provided a rallying point for the disaffected — especially in Eastern Eu- 
rope. Repression of the believers became increasingly difficult as the 


799 



Diplomacy 


morale of the governing groups weakened. But the demoralization was in 
the first instance caused by the stagnation of the system and the growing 
realization on the part of the communist elite — the higher their rank, 
the more likely they were to know the facts— that their system was in 
fact losing the struggle which it had proclaimed as its ultimate pur- 
pose throughout a long and brutal history. It was at best a chicken-and- 
egg proposition. The democratic idea rallied opposition to commu- 
nism but could not by itself have carried the day so quickly without the 
collapse of communist foreign policy and, in the end, of communist 
society. 

That was certainly the view of Marxist interpreters of international 
affairs, who were used to analyzing the “correlation of forces” and found 
it much easier to discover the causes of the Soviet collapse than American 
observers. In 1989, Fred Halliday, a Marxist professor at the London 
School of Economics, concluded that the balance of power had shifted in 
America’s favor. 47 Halliday considered this a tragedy but, unlike those self- 
tormenting Americans who were reluctant to credit their own country or 
its leaders, he acknowledged that a major shift in international politics 
had taken place during the Reagan years. America had succeeded in so 
raising the cost of Soviet involvement in the Third World that, in a chapter 
aptly titled “Socialism on the Defensive,” Halliday interpreted Gorba- 
chev’s “new thinking” as an attempt to appease American pressures. 

The strongest testimony to that effect came from Soviet sources. Start- 
ing in 1988, Soviet scholars began to acknowledge the Soviet responsibil- 
ity for the breakdown of detente. Showing a greater understanding of the 
premises of detente than many American critics, the Soviet commentators 
pointed out that detente had been Washington’s way of keeping Moscow 
from challenging the existing military and political status quo. By vio- 
lating this tacit understanding and seeking unilateral gains, the Brezhnev 
leadership had evoked the reaction of the Reagan years that proved to be 
more than the Soviet Union could handle. 

One of the earliest and most interesting of such Soviet “revisionist” 
commentaries came from Vyacheslav Dashichev, a professor at the Insti- 
tute for the Economy of the World Socialist System. In an article in Litera- 
tumaya Gazeta on May 18, 1988, 48 Dashichev pointed out that the historic 
“miscalculations and incompetent approach of the Brezhnev leadership” 
had united all of the world’s other major powers into a coalition against 
the Soviet Union, and had provoked an arms race which the Soviet Union 
had riot been able to afford. The traditional Soviet policy of standing 
apart from the world community while seeking to undermine it needed, 
therefore, to be abandoned. Dashichev wrote: 


800 



The End of the Cold War 


... as the West saw it, the Soviet leadership was actively exploiting 
detente to build up its own military forces, seeking military parity with 
the United States and in general with all the opposing powers — a fact 
without historical precedent. The United States, paralyzed by the Viet- 
nam catastrophe, reacted sensitively to the expansion of Soviet influ- 
ence in Africa, the Near East and other regions. 

. . . The operation of the “feedback” effect placed the Soviet Union in 
an extremely difficult position in the foreign policy and economic re- 
spects. It was opposed by the major world powers — the United States, 
Britain, France, the FRG, Italy, Japan, Canada, and China. Opposition to 
their vastly superior potential was dangerously far beyond the USSR’s 
abilities. 49 

The same point was made by Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevard- 
nadze in a speech on July 25, 1988, to a meeting at the Soviet Foreign 
Ministry. 50 He enumerated such Soviet mistakes as the Afghan debacle, 
the feud with China, the long-standing underestimation of the European 
Community, the costly arms race, the 1983-84 walkout from the Geneva 
arms control talks, the Soviet decision to deploy the SS-20s in the first 
place, and the Soviet defense doctrine according to which the U.S.S.R. 
had to be as strong as any potential coalition of states against it. In other 
words, Shevardnadze challenged almost everything the Soviet Union had 
done for twenty-five years. It was an implicit recognition that Western 
policies had had a major impact on the Soviet Union, for had the democ- 
racies imposed no penalty for adventurism, Soviet policy could have been 
described as successful and not in need of reassessment. 

The ending of the Cold War, sought by American policy through eight 
administrations of both political parties, was much as George Kennan had 
foreseen in 1947. Regardless of how accommodating a policy the West 
might have conducted, the Soviet system had needed the specter of a 
permanent outside enemy to justify the suffering it was imposing on its 
people and to maintain the armed forces and security apparatus essential 
to its rule. When, under the pressure of the cumulative Western response 
that culminated in the Reagan years, the Twenty-seventh Party Congress 
changed the official doctrine from coexistence to interdependence, the 
moral basis for domestic repression disappeared. Then it became evident, 
as Kennan had predicted, that the Soviet Union, whose citizens had been 
reared on discipline and could not readily switch to compromise and 
accommodation, would turn overnight from one of the strongest to “one 
of the weakest and most pitiable of national societies.” 51 

As noted earlier, Kennan eventually came to believe that his contain- 
ment policy had been overmilitarized. A more accurate assessment would 


801 



Diplomacy 


be that, as always, America had oscillated between overreliance on mili- 
tary strategy and emotional overdependence on the conversion of the 
adversary. I too had been critical of many of the individual policies which 
went under the name of containment. Yet the overall direction of Ameri- 
can policy was remarkably farsighted and remained remarkably consis- 
tent throughout changes in administration and an astonishingly varied 
array of personalities. 

Had America not organized resistance when a self-confident commu- 
nist empire was acting as if it represented the wave of the future and was 
causing the peoples and leaders of the world to believe that this might 
be so, the Communist Parties, which were then already the largest single 
parties in postwar Europe, might well have prevailed. The series of crises 
over Berlin could not have been sustained, and there would have been 
more of them. Exploiting America’s post-Vietnam trauma, the Kremlin 
sent proxy forces to Africa and its own troops into Afghanistan. It would 
have become far more assertive had America not protected the global 
balance of power and helped to rebuild democratic societies. That 
America did not perceive its role in terms of the balance of power com- 
pounded its pain and complicated the process, but it also served to bring 
about unprecedented dedication and creativity. Nor did it change the 
reality that it was America which had preserved the global equilibrium 
and therefore the peace of the world. 

Victory in the Cold War was not, of course, the achievement of any 
single administration. It came about as a result of the confluence of 
forty years of American bipartisan effort and seventy years of communist 
ossification. The phenomenon of Reagan sprang from a fortuitous conver- 
gence of personality and opportunity: a decade earlier, he would have 
seemed too militant; a decade later, too one-track. The combination of 
ideological militancy to rally the American public and diplomatic flexibil- 
ity, which conservatives would never have forgiven in another president, 
was exactly what was needed in the period of Soviet weakness and emerg- 
ing self-doubt. 

Yet the Reagan foreign policy was more in the nature of a brilliant 
sunset than of the dawn of a new era. The Cold War had been almost 
made to order to American preconceptions. There had been a dominant 
ideological challenge rendering universal maxims, however oversimpli- 
fied, applicable to most of the world’s problems. And there had been a 
clear and present military threat, and its source had been unambiguous. 
Even then, America’s travails — from Suez to Vietnam — resulted from its 
application of universal principles to specific cases which proved inhospi- 
table to them. 


802 



The End of the Cold War 


In the post-Cold War world, there is no overriding ideological chal- 
lenge or, at this writing, single geostrategic confrontation. Almost every 
situation is a special case. Exceptionalism inspired America’s foreign pol- 
icy and gave the United States the fortitude to prevail in the Cold War. 
But it will require far more subtle applications in the multipolar world of 
the twenty-first century. America will finally have to face the challenge it 
has been able to avoid through most of its history: whether its traditional 
perception of itself as either strictly beacon or crusader still defines its 
choices or limits them; whether, in short, it must at last develop some 
definition of its national interest. 


803 



CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE 

The New World Order 
Reconsidered 


By the beginning of the last decade of the twentieth century, Wilsonian- 
ism seemed triumphant. The communist ideological and the Soviet geo- 
political challenges had been overcome simultaneously. The objective of 
moral opposition to communism had merged with the geopolitical task 
of resisting Soviet expansionism. No wonder that President Bush pro- 
claimed his hope for a new world order in classically Wilsonian terms: 

We have a vision of a new partnership of nations that transcends the 
Cold War. A partnership based on consultation, cooperation, and collec- 
tive action, especially through international and regional organizations. 

A partnership united by principle and the rule of law and supported by 


804 


The New World Order Reconsidered 


an equitable sharing of both cost and commitment. A partnership 
whose goals are to increase democracy, increase prosperity, increase 
the peace, and reduce arms . 1 

Bush’s Democratic successor, President Bill Clinton, expressed America’s 
goals in very similar terms, expounding on the theme of “enlarging de- 
mocracy”: 

In a new era of peril and opportunity, our overriding purpose must 
be to expand and strengthen the world’s community of market-based 
democracies. During the Cold War, we sought to contain a threat to 
survival of free institutions. Now we seek to enlarge the circle of nations 
that live under those free institutions, for our dream is of a day when 
the opinions and energies of every person in the world will be given 
full expression in a world of thriving democracies that cooperate with 
each other and live in peace . 2 

For the third time in this century, America thus proclaimed its intention 
to build a new world order by applying its domestic values to the world 
at large. And, for the third time, America seemed to tower over the 
international stage. In 1918, Wilson had overshadowed a Paris Peace Con- 
ference at which America’s allies were too dependent on it to insist on 
voicing their misgivings. Toward the end of the Second World War, Frank- 
lin Delano Roosevelt and Truman seemed to be in a position to recast 
the entire globe on the American model. 

The end of the Cold War produced an even greater temptation to 
recast the international environment in America’s image. Wilson had been 
constrained by isolationism at home, and Truman had come up against 
Stalinist expansionism. In the post-Cold War world, the United States is 
the only remaining superpower with the capacity to intervene in every 
part of the globe. Yet power has become more diffuse and the issues to 
which military force is relevant have diminished. Victory in the Cold War 
has propelled America into a world which bears many similarities to the 
European state system of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and 
to practices which American statesmen and thinkers have consistently 
questioned. The absence of both an overriding ideological or strategic 
threat frees nations to pursue foreign policies based increasingly on their 
immediate national interest. In an international system characterized by 
perhaps five or six major powers and a multiplicity of smaller states, 
order will have to emerge much as it did in past centuries from a reconcil- 
iation and balancing of competing national interests. 


805 



Diplomacy 


Both Bush and Clinton spoke of the new world order as if it were just 
around the corner. In fact, it is still in a period of gestation, and its final 
form will not be visible until well into the next century. Part extension of 
the past, part unprecedented, the new world order, like those which it 
succeeds, will emerge as an answer to three questions: What are the basic 
units of the international order? What are their means of interacting? What 
are the goals on behalf of which they interact? 

International systems live precariously. Every “world order” expresses 
an aspiration to permanence; the very term has a ring of eternity about it. 
Yet the elements which comprise it are in constant flux; indeed, with each 
century, the duration of international systems has been shrinking. The 
order that grew out of the Peace of Westphalia lasted 150 years; the 
international system created by the Congress of Vienna maintained itself 
for a hundred years; the international order characterized by the Cold 
War ended after forty years. (The Versailles settlement never operated as 
a system adhered to by the major powers, and amounted to little more 
than an armistice between two world wars.) Never before have the com- 
ponents of world order, their capacity to interact, and their goals all 
changed quite so rapidly, so deeply, or so globally. 

Whenever the entities constituting the international system change 
their character, a period of turmoil inevitably follows. The Thirty Years’ 
War was in large part about the transition from feudal societies based on 
tradition and claims of universality to the modern state system based on 
raison d’etat. The wars of the French Revolution marked the transition to 
the nation-state defined by common language and culture. The wars of 
the twentieth century were caused by the disintegration of the Habsburg 
and Ottoman Empires, the challenge to the dominance of Europe, and 
the end of colonialism. In each transition, what had been taken for 
granted suddenly became anachronistic: multinational states in the nine- 
teenth century, colonialism in the twentieth. 

Since the Congress of Vienna, foreign policy has related nations to 
each other — hence the term “international relations.” In the nineteenth 
century, the appearance of even one new nation — such as the united 
Germany — produced decades of turmoil. Since the end of the Second 
World War, nearly a hundred new nations have come into being, many of 
them quite different from the historic European nation-state. The collapse 
of communism in the Soviet Union and the breakup of Yugoslavia have 
spawned another twenty nations, many of which have concentrated on 
re-enacting century-old bloodlusts. 

The nineteenth-century European nation was based on common lan- 
guage and culture, and, given the technology of the times, provided the 


806 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


optimum framework for security, economic growth, and for influencing 
international events. In the post-Cold War world, the traditional Euro- 
pean nation-states — the countries which formed the Concert of Europe 
until the First World War — lack the resources for a global role. The 
success of their effort to consolidate themselves into the European Union 
will determine their future influence. United, Europe will continue as a 
Great Power; divided into national states, it will slide into secondary 
status. 

Part of the turmoil associated with the emergence of a new world order 
results from the fact that at least three types of states calling themselves 
“nations” are interacting while sharing few of the nation-states’ historic 
attributes. On the one side are the ethnic splinters from disintegrating 
empires, such as the successor states of Yugoslavia or of the Soviet Union. 
Obsessed by historic grievances and age-old quests for identity, they 
strive primarily to prevail in ancient ethnic rivalries. The goal of interna- 
tional order is beyond their fields of interest and frequently beyond their 
imaginations. Like the smaller states embroiled in the Thirty Years’ War, 
they seek to preserve their independence and to increase their power 
without regard for the more cosmopolitan considerations of an interna- 
tional political order. 

Some of the postcolonial nations represent yet another distinct phe- 
nomenon. For many of them, the current borders represent the adminis- 
trative convenience of the imperial powers. French Africa, possessing a 
large coastline, was segmented into seventeen administrative units, each 
of which has since become a state. Belgian Africa — then called the Congo, 
now Zaire — had only a very narrow outlet to the sea, and hence was 
governed as a single unit even though it constitutes an area as large as 
Western Europe. In such circumstances, the state too often came to mean 
the army, which was usually the only “national” institution. When that 
claim has collapsed, civil war has frequently been the consequence. If 
nineteenth-century standards of nationhood or Wilsonian principles of 
self-determination were applied to such nations, a radical and unpredict- 
able realignment of frontiers would be inevitable. For them, the alterna- 
tive to the territorial status quo lies in endless and brutal civil conflict. 

Finally, there are the continental-type states — which will probably rep- 
resent the basic units of the new world order. The Indian nation that 
emerged from British colonial rule unites a multiplicity of tongues, reli- 
gions, and nationalities. Since it is more susceptible to religious and 
ideological currents within neighboring states than the European nations 
of the nineteenth century, the dividing line between its foreign and do- 
mestic policies is both different and far more tenuous. Similarly, China is 


807 



Diplomacy 


a conglomerate of different languages held together by common writing, 
common culture, and common history. It is what Europe might have 
become had it not been for the religious wars of the seventeenth century, 
and what it might yet turn out to be if the European Union fulfills the 
hopes of its supporters. Similarly, the two superpowers of the Cold War 
period have never been nation-states in the European sense. America 
had succeeded in forming a distinct culture from a polyglot national 
composition; the Soviet Union was an empire containing many nationali- 
ties. Its successor states — especially the Russian Federation — are, at this 
writing, torn between disintegration and reimperialization, much as were 
the Habsburg and Ottoman Empires of the nineteenth century. 

All this has radically changed the substance, the method, and, above all, 
the reach of international relations. Until the modern period, the various 
continents pursued their activities largely in isolation from each other. It 
would have been impossible to measure the power of, say, France against 
that of China because the two countries had no means of interacting. 
Once the reach of technology had broadened, the future of other conti- 
nents was determined by the “Concert” of European powers. No previous 
international order has contained major centers of power distributed 
around the entire globe. Nor had statesmen ever been obliged to conduct 
diplomacy in an environment where events can be experienced instanta- 
neously and simultaneously by leaders and their publics. 

As the number of states multiplies and their capacity to interact in- 
creases, on what principles can a new world order be organized? Given 
the complexity of the new international system, can Wilsonian concepts 
like “enlarging democracy” serve as the principal guides to American 
foreign policy and as replacement for the Cold War strategy of contain- 
ment? Clearly, these concepts have been neither an unqualified success 
nor an unqualified failure. Some of the finest acts of twentieth-century 
diplomacy had their roots in the idealism of Woodrow Wilson: the Mar- 
shall Plan, the brave commitment to containing communism, defense of 
the freedom of Western Europe, and even the ill-fated League of Nations 
and its later incarnation, the United Nations. 

At the same time, Wilsonian idealism has produced a plethora of prob- 
lems. As embodied in the Fourteen Points, the uncritical espousal of 
ethnic self-determination failed to take account of power relationships 
and the destabilizing effects of ethnic groups single-mindedly pursuing 
their accumulated rivalries and ancient hatreds. The failure to give the 
League of Nations a military enforcement mechanism underlined the 
problems inherent in Wilson’s notion of collective security. The ineffec- 
tual Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928, by which nations renounced war as a 


808 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


means of policy, showed the limits of exclusively legal restraints. As Hitler 
was to demonstrate, in the world of diplomacy, a loaded gun is often 
more potent than a legal brief. Wilson’s appeal to America to go forth in 
the pursuit of democracy produced acts of great creativity. It also led it to 
such disastrous crusades as Vietnam. 

The end of the Cold War has created what some observers have called 
a “unipolar” or “one-superpower” world. But the United States is actually 
in no better position to dictate the global agenda unilaterally than it was 
at the beginning of the Cold War. America is more preponderant than it 
was ten years ago, yet, ironically, power has also become more diffuse. 
Thus, America’s ability to employ it to shape the rest of the world has 
actually decreased. 

Victory in the Cold War has made it far more difficult to implement the 
Wilsonian dream of universal collective security. In the absence of a 
potentially dominating power, the principal nations do not view threats 
to the peace in the same way, nor are they willing to run the same risks 
in overcoming those threats they do recognize (see chapters 10, 11, 15, 
and 16). The world community is willing enough to cooperate in 
“peacekeeping” — that is, in policing an existing agreement not chal- 
lenged by any of the parties — but it has been skittish about peacemaking 
— the suppression of actual challenges to world order. This is not surpris- 
ing, since not even the United States has as yet developed a clear concept 
of what it will resist unilaterally in the post-Cold War world. 

As an approach to foreign policy, Wilsonianism presumes that America 
is possessed of an exceptional nature expressed in unrivaled virtue and 
unrivaled power. The United States was so confident of its strength and 
the virtue of its aims that it could envision fighting for its values on a 
worldwide basis. American exceptionalism must be the point of depar- 
ture for a Wilsonian foreign policy. 

As the twenty-first century approaches, vast global forces are at work 
that, over the course of time, will render the United States less excep- 
tional. American military power will remain unrivaled for the foreseeable 
future. Yet America’s desire to project that power into the myriad small- 
scale conflicts which the world is likely to witness in the coming decades 
— Bosnia, Somalia, and Haiti — is a key conceptual challenge for American 
foreign policy. The United States will likely have the world’s most power- 
ful economy well into the next century. Yet wealth will become more 
widely spread, as will the technology for generating wealth. The United 
States will face economic competition of a kind it never experienced 
during the Cold War. 

America will be the greatest and most powerful nation, but a nation 


809 



Diplomacy 


with peers; the primus inter pares but nonetheless a nation like others. 
The American exceptionalism that is the indispensable basis for a Wilson- 
ian foreign policy is therefore likely to be less relevant in the coming 
century. 

Americans should not view this as a humbling of America or as a 
symptom of national decline. For most of its history, the United States 
was in fact a nation among others, not a preponderate superpower. The 
rise of other power centers — in Western Europe, Japan, and China — 
should not alarm Americans. After all, sharing the world’s resources and 
the development of other societies and economies has been a peculiarly 
American objective ever since the Marshall Plan. 

Yet if the premise of Wilsonianism is becoming less relevant and the 
dictates of Wilsonian foreign policy — collective security, the conversion 
of one’s competitors to the American way, an international system that 
adjudicates disputes in a legal fashion, and unqualified support for ethnic 
self-determination — are becoming less practicable, on what principles 
ought America to base its foreign policy in the coming century? History 
provides no guidebook, nor even analogies that completely satisfy. Yet 
history teaches by example and, as America moves into uncharted waters, 
it would do well to consider the era before Woodrow Wilson and the 
“American century” for clues about the decades to come. 

Richelieu’s concept of raison d'etat — that the interests of the state 
justify the means used to pursue them — has always been repugnant to 
Americans. That is not to say that Americans have never practiced raison 
d'etat — there are many instances of it, from the time of the Founding 
Fathers’ shrewd dealings with the European powers in the early decades 
of the republic to the single-minded pursuit of Western expansion, which 
was placed under the rubric of “manifest destiny.” But Americans have 
never been comfortable acknowledging openly their own selfish inter- 
ests. Whether fighting world wars or local conflicts, American leaders 
always claimed to be struggling in the name of principle, not interest. 

For any student of European history, the concept of balance of power 
seems utterly obvious. But the balance of power, like raison d'etat, is a 
development of the last couple of centuries, originally propagated by the 
English King, William III, who sought to rein in the expansionist drives 
of France. The concept that a coalition of weaker states would bind to- 
gether to form a counterweight to the stronger was not in itself remark- 
able. Yet the balance of power requires constant tending. In the next 
century, American leaders will have to articulate for their public a concept 
of the national interest and explain how that interest is served — in Eu- 
rope and in Asia — by the maintenance of the balance of power. America 


810 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


will need partners to preserve equilibrium in several regions of the 
world, and these partners can not always be chosen on the basis of moral 
considerations alone. A clear definition of the national interest needs to 
be an equally essential guide to American policy. 

The international system which lasted the longest without a major war 
was the one following the Congress of Vienna. It combined legitimacy and 
equilibrium, shared values, and balance-of-power diplomacy. Common 
values restrained the scope of nations’ demands while equilibrium lim- 
ited the capacity to insist on them. In the twentieth century, America has 
tried twice to create a world order based almost exclusively on its values. 
It represents a heroic effort responsible for much of what is good in the 
contemporary world. But Wilsonianism cannot be the sole basis for the 
post-Cold War era. 

The growth of democracy will continue as America’s dominant aspira- 
tion, but it is necessary to recognize the obstacles it faces at the moment 
of its seeming philosophical triumph. Curbing the power of the central 
government has been a principal concern of Western political theorists, 
whereas, in most other societies, political theory has sought to buttress 
the authority of the state. Nowhere else has there been such an insistence 
on expanding personal freedom. Western democracy evolved in cultur- 
ally homogeneous societies with a long common history (even America, 
with its polyglot population, developed a strong cultural identity). The 
society and, in a sense, the nation preceded the state without having to 
be created by it. In such a setting, political parties represent variants 
of an underlying consensus; today’s minority is potentially tomorrow’s 
majority. 

In most other parts of the world, the state has preceded the nation; it 
was and often remains the principal element in forming it. Political par- 
ties, where they exist, reflect fixed, usually communal, identities; minori- 
ties and majorities tend to be permanent. In such societies, the political 
process is about domination, not alternation in office, which takes place, 
if at all, by coups rather than by constitutional procedures. The concept of 
a loyal opposition — the essence of modern democracy — rarely prevails. 
Much more frequently, opposition is viewed as a threat to national cohe- 
sion, equated with treason, and ruthlessly suppressed. 

Western-style democracy presupposes a consensus on values that sets 
limits to partisanship. America would not be true to itself if it did not 
insist on the universal applicability of the idea of liberty. That America 
should give preference to democratic governments over repressive ones 
and be prepared to pay some price for its moral convictions is beyond 
dispute. That there is an area of discretion which should be exercised in 


811 



Diplomacy 


favor of governments and institutions promoting democratic values and 
human rights is also clear. The difficulty arises in determining the precise 
price to be paid and its relationship to other essential American priorities, 
including national security and the overall geopolitical balance. If Ameri- 
can exhortations are to go beyond patriotic rhetoric, they must reflect a 
realistic understanding of America’s reach. America must be careful not 
to multiply moral commitments while the financial and military resources 
for the conduct of a global foreign policy are being curtailed. Sweeping 
pronouncements not matched by either the ability or the willingness to 
back them up diminish America’s influence on all other matters as well. 

The precise balance between the moral and the strategic elements of 
American foreign policy cannot be prescribed in the abstract. But the 
beginning of wisdom consists of recognizing that a balance needs to be 
struck. However powerful America is, no country has the capacity to 
impose all its preferences on the rest of mankind; priorities must be 
established. Even if the resources for it existed, undifferentiated Wilsoni- 
anism would not be supported once the American public clearly under- 
stood its corollary commitments and involvements. It runs the risk of 
being turned into a slogan to escape difficult geopolitical choices by 
means of pronouncements involving little apparent risk. A gap is threaten- 
ing to open up in America’s policy between its pretentions and its willing- 
ness to support them; the nearly inevitable disillusionment too easily 
turns into an excuse for withdrawing from world affairs altogether. 

In the post-Cold War world, American idealism needs the leaven of 
geopolitical analysis to find its way through the maze of new complexities. 
That will not be easy. America refused to dominate even when it had the 
nuclear monopoly, and it disdained the balance of power even when 
conducting, as during the Cold War, what was in effect a spheres of 
interest diplomacy. In the twenty-first century, America, like other nations, 
must learn to navigate between necessity and choice, between the immu- 
table constants of international relations and the elements subject to the 
discretion of statesmen. 

Wherever the balance is established between values and necessity, for- 
eign policy must begin with some definition of what constitutes a vital 
interest— a change in the international environment so likely to under- 
mine the national security that it must be resisted no matter what form 
the threat takes or how ostensibly legitimate it appears. During its heyday, 
Great Britain would have gone to war to prevent the occupation of the 
Channel ports in the Low Countries even if they had been taken over by 
a major power governed by saints. For the greater part of American 
history, the Monroe Doctrine served as an operating definition of the 


812 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


American national interest. Since Woodrow Wilson’s entry into World 
War I, America has avoided defining a national interest with the argument 
that it was not opposed to change as such, but to the use of force to bring 
it about. Neither definition is adequate any longer; the Monroe Doctrine 
is too restrictive, Wilsonianism is both too vague and too legalistic. The 
controversy surrounding almost all American military actions in the post- 
Cold War period shows that a wider consensus on where America should 
draw the line does not yet exist. To bring it about is a major challenge to 
national leadership. 

Geopolitically, America is an island off the shores of the large landmass 
of Eurasia, whose resources and population far exceed those of the 
United States. The domination by a single power of either of Eurasia’s 
two principal spheres — Europe or Asia — remains a good definition of 
strategic danger for America, Cold War or no Cold War. For such a group- 
ing would have the capacity to outstrip America economically and, in the 
end, militarily. That danger would have to be resisted even were the 
dominant power apparently benevolent, for if the intentions ever 
changed, America would find itself with a grossly diminished capacity for 
effective resistance and a growing inability to shape events. 

America was projected into the Cold War by the threat of Soviet expan- 
sionism, and it has based much of its post-Cold War expectations on the 
disappearance of the communist menace. Just as attitudes toward Soviet 
hostility had shaped America’s attitudes toward the global order — from 
the perspective of containment — so have Russia’s reform efforts domi- 
nated America’s thinking on the post-Cold War world order. American 
policy has been based on the premise that peace can be ensured by a 
Russia tempered by democracy and concentrating its energies on devel- 
oping a market economy. In this light, America’s principal task is con- 
ceived to be to strengthen Russian reform, with measures drawn from 
the experience of the Marshall Plan rather than from the traditional pat- 
terns of foreign policy. 

With respect to no other country has American policy been geared as 
consistently to an assessment of its intentions rather than to its potential 
or even its policies. Franklin Roosevelt had staked his hopes for a peaceful 
postwar world to a considerable degree on Stalin’s moderation. During 
the Cold War, the operative American strategy — containment — had as its 
declared aim changing Soviet purposes, and the debate concerning it was 
generally about whether the expected change in Soviet purposes had 
already occurred. Among postwar presidents, only Nixon consistently 
dealt with the Soviet Union as a geopolitical challenge. Even Reagan 
placed great stock in what amounted to the conversion of Soviet leaders. 


813 



Diplomacy 


Not surprisingly, in the aftermath of the communist collapse, it has been 
assumed that hostile intentions have disappeared, and, since the Wilson* 
ian tradition rejects conflicting interests, American post-Cold War policy 
has been conducted as if traditional foreign policy considerations no 
longer apply. 

Students of geopolitics and history are uneasy about the single-mind- 
edness of this approach. They fear that, in overestimating America’s ability 
to shape Russia’s internal evolution, America may involve itself needlessly 
in internal Russian controversies, generate a nationalist backlash, and 
neglect the usual tasks of foreign policy. They would support a policy 
designed to modify Russia’s traditional truculence and would for that 
reason favor economic aid and cooperative projects on global issues. 
They would argue, however, that Russia, regardless of who governs it, sits 
astride the territory Halford Mackinder called the geopolitical heartland, 
and is the heir to one of the most potent imperial traditions . 3 Even were 
the postulated moral transformation to occur, it would take time, and in 
that interlude America should hedge its bets. 

Nor should America expect economic aid to achieve results in Russia 
comparable to those of the Marshall Plan. The Western Europe of the 
immediate postwar period had a functioning market system, well-estab- 
lished bureaucracies, and, in most countries, a democratic tradition. It 
was linked to America by the military and ideological threat from the 
Soviet Union. Behind the shield of the Atlantic Alliance, economic reform 
caused an underlying geopolitical reality to re-emerge; the Marshall Plan 
enabled Europe to re-establish its traditional pattern of domestic gover- 
nance. 

Comparable conditions do not exist anywhere in post-Cold War Rus- 
sia. Alleviating suffering and encouraging economic reform are important 
tools of American foreign policy; they are not, however, substitutes for a 
serious effort to maintain the global balance of power vis-a-vis a country 
with a long history of expansionism. 

At this writing, the vast Russian empire acquired over the course of two 
centuries is in a state of disintegration — much as it was in the period 
1917-23, from which it recovered without interrupting its traditional 
expansionist rhythm. Managing the decline of a decaying empire is one 
of diplomacy’s most formidable tasks. Nineteenth-century diplomacy 
slowed the unraveling of the Ottoman Empire and kept it from spilling 
over into a general war; twentieth-century diplomacy proved unable to 
contain the consequences of the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian 
Empire. Collapsing empires generate two causes of tension: attempts by 
neighbors to take advantage of the weakness of the imperial center, and 
efforts by the declining empire to restore its authority at the periphery. 


814 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


Both processes are going on simultaneously in the successor states of 
the former Soviet Union. Iran and Turkey are seeking to increase their 
roles in the Central Asian republics, where the population is largely Mus- 
lim. But the dominant geopolitical thrust has been Russia’s attempt to 
restore its pre-eminence in all the territories formerly controlled from 
Moscow. In the name of peacekeeping, Russia seeks to re-establish some 
form of Russian tutelage, and the United States, focusing on the goodwill 
of a “reformist” government and reluctant to embrace a geopolitical 
agenda, has thus far acquiesced. It has done little to enable the successor 
republics — other than the Baltic states — to achieve international accep- 
tance. Visits there by senior American officials are few and far between; 
aid is minimal. The activities of Russian troops on their territory, or even 
their presence, is rarely challenged. Moscow is treated de facto as the 
imperial center, which is also what it conceives itself to be. 

This is in part because America has been dealing with the anticommu- 
nist and the anti-imperialist revolutions taking place on the soil of the 
former Soviet Empire as if they were a single phenomenon. In fact, they 
work in opposite directions. The anticommunist revolution has enjoyed 
substantial support throughout the territory of the former Soviet Union. 
The anti-imperialist revolution, directed against domination by Russia, is 
widely popular in. the new non-Russian republics and extremely unpopu- 
lar in the Russian Federation. For Russian leadership groups have histori- 
cally perceived their state in terms of a “civilizing” mission (see chapters 
7 and 8); the overwhelming majority of Russia’s leading figures — what- 
ever their political persuasion — refuse to accept the collapse of the Soviet 
Empire or the legitimacy of the successor states, especially of Ukraine, 
the cradle of Russian Orthodoxy. Even Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, when 
writing about ridding Russia of the incubus of unwilling foreign subjects, 
urged the retention by Moscow of a core group of Ukraine, Belarus, and 
almost half of Kazakhstan, 4 nearly 90 percent of the former empire. On 
the territory of the former Soviet Union, not every anticommunist is a 
democrat, and not every democrat is opposed to Russian imperialism. 

A realistic policy would recognize that even the reformist Russian gov- 
ernment of Boris Yeltsin has maintained Russian armies on the territory 
of most of the former Soviet republics — all members of the United Na- 
tions — often against the express wish of the host government. These 
military forces have participated in the civil wars of several of the repub- 
lics. The foreign minister of Russia has repeatedly put forward a concept 
of a Russian monopoly on peacekeeping in the “near abroad,” indistin- 
guishable from an attempt to re-establish Moscow’s domination. Long- 
term prospects for peace will be influenced by Russian reform, but short- 
term prospects will depend on whether Russian armies can be induced 


815 



Diplomacy 


to stay at home. If they reappear along the borders of the old empire in 
Europe and in the Middle East, the historic tension — compounded by 
fear and mutual suspicion — between Russia and its neighbors will surely 
re-emerge (see chapters 6 and 7). 

Russia is bound to have a special security interest in what it calls the 
‘near abroad” — the republics of the former Soviet Union — as distin- 
guished from the lands beyond the old empire. But the peace of the 
world requires that this interest be satisfied without military pressure or 
unilateral military intervention. The key issue is whether to treat Russia’s 
relationship to the new republics as an international problem subject to 
accepted rules of foreign policy, or as an outgrowth of Russia’s unilateral 
decision-making which America will seek to influence, if at all, by appeals 
to the Russian leadership’s goodwill. In certain areas — for example, the 
republics of Central Asia threatened by Islamic fundamentalism — the 
United States’ national interest probably parallels Russia’s, at least as it 
applies to resistance to Iranian fundamentalism. Cooperation there would 
be quite possible so long as it does not write a script for a return to 
traditional Russian imperialism. 

At this writing, the prospects for democracy in Russia are as yet uncer- 
tain, nor is it clear that even a democratic Russia will conduct policies 
conducive to international stability. Throughout its dramatic history, Rus- 
sia has marched to quite a different drummer from the rest of the Western 
world. It never had an autonomous church; it missed the Reformation, 
the Enlightenment, the Age of Discovery, and modern market economics. 
Leaders with democratic experience are in short supply. Almost all of 
Russia’s leaders — as well as those in the new republics — held high office 
under communism; commitment to pluralism was not their first instinct, 
and it may not prove to be their last. 

Moreover, the transition from a centrally planned to a market economy 
has proved painful wherever it has been attempted. Managers have no 
experience with markets and incentives; workers have lost their motiva- 
tion; ministers have never had to concern themselves with fiscal policy. 
Stagnation, even decline, is nearly inevitable. No centrally planned econ- 
omy has yet managed to avoid painful austerity on the road to market 
economics, and the problem has been compounded by the cold-turkey 
approach recommended by so many American expert advisers. Dissatis- 
faction with the social and economic costs of transition has enabled com- 
munists to gain significantly in postcommunist Poland, Slovakia, and 
Hungary. In the Russian parliamentary election of December 1993, the 
Communist and Nationalist Parties together achieved nearly 50 percent 
of the vote. 


816 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


Even sincere reformers may see in traditional Russian nationalism a 
unifying force to achieve their objectives. And, in Russia, nationalism 
has historically been missionary and imperial. Psychologists can debate 
whether the reason was a deep-rooted sense of insecurity or congenital 
aggressiveness. For the victims of Russian expansion, the distinction has 
been academic. In Russia, democratization and a restrained foreign policy 
may not necessarily go hand in hand. This is why the argument that peace 
will be secured primarily by Russian domestic reform finds few adherents 
in Eastern Europe, Scandinavia, or China, and why Poland, the Czech 
Republic, Slovakia, and Hungary are so keen to join the Atlantic Alliance. 

A course of action geared to foreign policy considerations would seek 
to create counterweights to foreseeable tendencies and not place all the 
chips on domestic reform. While supporting Russian free markets and 
Russian democracy, it would also seek to bolster the obstacles to Russian 
expansion. It could be argued, in fact, that Russian reform would be 
strengthened if Russia is encouraged to concentrate — for the first time in 
its history — on emphasizing the development of its national territory, 
which, extending over eleven time zones, from St. Petersburg to Vladivos- 
tok, gives no cause for claustrophobia. 

For the post-Cold War period, American policy toward postcommunist 
Russia has staked everything on a kind of social engineering geared to 
individual leaders. In the Bush Administration, it was Mikhail Gorbachev 
and, under Clinton, it has been Boris Yeltsin, who, because of their per- 
ceived personal commitment to democracy, have been treated as the 
personal guarantors of a peaceful Russian foreign policy and of Russia’s 
integration into the international community. Bush deplored the disinte- 
gration of Gorbachev’s U.S.S.R., and Clinton has acquiesced in the efforts 
to restore Russia’s old sphere of influence. America’s leaders have been 
reluctant to invoke the traditional diplomatic brakes on Russian policy 
for fear of provoking Yeltsin’s (and, before that, Gorbachev’s) presumed 
nationalist opponents. 

Russo-American relations desperately need a serious dialogue on for- 
eign policy issues. It does Russia no favor to be treated as immune from 
normal considerations of foreign policy, for this will have the practical 
result of forcing it to pay a heavier price later on if it is lured into courses 
of action from which there is no retreat. American leaders should not 
fear frank discussions about where American and Russian interests con- 
verge and where they differ. The veterans of Russia’s internal struggles 
are not blushing novices whose internal balances will be unhinged by 
realistic dialogue. They are quite capable of comprehending a policy 
based on mutual respect of each other’s national interests. In fact, they 


817 



Diplomacy 


are likely to understand such a calculus better than appeals to an abstract 
and distant utopianism. 

Integrating Russia into the international system is a key task of the 
emerging international order. It has two components which must be kept 
in balance: influencing Russian attitudes and affecting Russian calcula- 
tions. Generous economic assistance and technical advice is necessary to 
ease the pains of transition, and Russia should be made welcome in 
institutions which foster economic, cultural, and political cooperation — 
such as the European Security Conference. But Russian reform will be 
impeded, not helped, by turning a blind eye to the reappearance of 
historic Russian imperial pretensions. The independence of the new re- 
publics, recognized after all by the United Nations, must not be tacitly 
downgraded by acquiescence in Russian military moves on their soil. 

American policy toward Russia should be geared to permanent inter- 
ests, not to the fluctuations of Russian domestic politics. If American 
foreign policy makes Russian domestic politics its top priority, it will 
become the victim of forces essentially out of its control and lose all 
criteria for judgment. Should the foreign policy be calibrated toward 
every quiver of an essentially revolutionary process? Does America disen- 
gage from Russia whenever some domestic change occurs of which it 
does not approve? Can the United States afford to try to isolate Russia and 
China simultaneously and resurrect in the name of its domestic prefer- 
ences the Sino-Soviet alliance? A less intrusive Russian policy at this stage 
would permit a steadier long-term course later on. 

Advocates of what I have defined in chapter 28 as the “psychiatric” 
school of foreign policy tend to reject such arguments as “pessimistic.” 
They say that, after all, Germany and Japan have changed their character, 
why not Russia? But it is also true that democratic Germany changed in 
the opposite direction in the 1930s, and that those who relied on its 
intentions suddenly found themselves face-to-face with its capabilities. 

A statesman can always escape his dilemmas by making the most favor- 
able assumptions about the future; one of his tests is his ability to protect 
against unfavorable and even unforeseen contingencies. The new Russian 
leadership is entitled to understanding for the anguishing process of 
trying to overcome two generations of communist misrule. It is not enti- 
tled to be handed the sphere of influence that tsars and commissars have 
coveted all around Russia’s vast borders for 300 years. If Russia is to 
become a serious partner in building a new world order, it must be ready 
for the disciplines of stability as well as for its benefits. 

The American policy that has come closest to the generally accepted 
definition of a vital interest has been toward its allies in the Atlantic area. 


818 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


Although the North Atlantic Treaty Organization was usually justified in 
Wilsonian terms as an instrument of collective security and not as an 
alliance, it in fact represented the institution that most nearly harmonized 
America’s moral and geopolitical objectives (see chapter 16). Since its 
purpose was to prevent Soviet domination of Europe, it served the geopo- 
litical purpose of keeping the power centers of Europe and Asia from 
falling under the rule of a hostile country, whatever the justification given 
on its behalf. 

The architects of the Atlantic Alliance would have been incredulous 
had they been told that victory in the Cold War would raise doubts about 
the future of their creation. They took it for granted that the prize for 
victory in the Cold War was a lasting Atlantic partnership. In the name of 
that goal, some of the decisive political battles of the Cold War were 
fought and won. In the process, America was tied to Europe by permanent 
consultative institutions and an integrated military command system — a 
structure of a scope and duration unique in the history of coalitions. 

What came to be called the Atlantic Community — a nostalgic term far 
less in vogue since the end of the Cold War — has been marking time 
since the collapse of communism. Downgrading the relationship with 
Europe has become all too fashionable. The emphasis on the enlarge- 
ment of democracy notwithstanding, America now seems to be giving 
less attention to societies that have similar institutions and with which it 
shares common attitudes on human rights and other basic values than to 
other regions of the world. The founders of the Atlantic ties — Truman, 
Acheson, Marshall, and Eisenhower — shared most Americans’ reserva- 
tions about the European style of diplomacy. But they understood that, 
without its Atlantic ties, America would find itself in a world of nations 
with which — except in the Western Hemisphere — it has few moral bonds 
or common traditions. In these circumstances, America would be obliged 
to conduct a pure Realpolitik, which is essentially incompatible with the 
American tradition. 

Part of the reason for the decline of what was once the most vital 
American policy is that NATO has come to be taken for granted as part of 
a landscape that needs no further tending. Perhaps more important, the 
generation of American leaders which has reached prominence in the 
last decade and a half has been drawn mostly from the South and 
the West, where there are fewer emotional and personal ties to Europe 
than among the old Northeastern establishment. Moreover, American lib- 
erals — the standard-bearers of Wilsonianism — have frequently felt let 
down by democratic allies which practice a policy of national interest 
rather than of collective security and reliance on international law; they 


819 



Diplomacy 


cite Bosnia and the Middle East as examples of a failure to agree in spite 
of common values. At the same time, the isolationist wing of American 
conservatism — the other form of exceptionalism — has been tempted to 
turn its back on what it disdains as Europe’s Machiavellian relativism and 
selfishness. 

Disagreements with Europe have the grating character of family squab- 
bles. Yet, on nearly every key issue, there has been far more cooperation 
from Europe than from any other area. In fairness, it must be recalled 
that, in Bosnia, French and British troops were on the ground, and Ameri- 
can troops were not, although the public rhetoric has created the oppo- 
site impression. And, in the Gulf War, the most important non-American 
contingents were, once again, British and French. Twice in a generation, 
shared values and interests brought American troops to Europe. In the 
post-Cold War world, Europe may not be able to rally itself to a new 
Atlantic policy, but America owes it to itself not to abandon the policies 
of three generations in the hour of victory. The task before the Alliance 
is to adapt the two basic institutions which shape the Atlantic relationship, 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the European Union 
(formerly the European Economic Community), to the realities of the 
post-Cold War world. 

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization remains the principal institu- 
tional link between America and Europe. When NATO was formed, Soviet 
troops stood at the Elbe in a divided Germany. Generally believed capa- 
ble of overrunning Western Europe with its conventional forces, the So- 
viet military establishment soon acquired a rapidly growing nuclear 
armory as well. Throughout the Cold War, Western Europe depended on 
the United States for its security, and post-Cold War NATO institutions 
still reflect this state of affairs. The United States controls the integrated 
command which is headed by an American general, and it has resisted 
French attempts to bring about a distinct European identity for defense. 

The movement for European integration had its origin in two proposi- 
tions: that, unless Europe learned to speak with one voice, it would 
gradually slide into irrelevance, and that a divided Germany must not be 
placed in a position where it would be tempted to float between the two 
blocs and play the two sides of the Cold War off against each other. At 
this writing, the European Union, originally composed of six nations, has 
grown to twelve and is in the process of expanding to include Scandina- 
via, Austria, and ultimately some of the former Soviet satellites. 

The premises on which both of these institutions were founded have 
been shaken by the collapse of the Soviet Union and the unification of 
Germany. The Soviet army no longer exists, and the Russian army stands 


820 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


hundreds of miles to the east. For the immediate future, Russia’s domestic 
turmoil renders an attack on Western Europe improbable. At the same 
time, Russian tendencies to re-establish the former empire have reawak- 
ened historic fears of Russian expansionism, especially in the former 
satellite states of Eastern Europe. No leader among Russia’s immediate 
neighbors shares America’s faith in Russian conversion as the key to his 
country’s security. All prefer President Boris Yeltsin to his opponents, but 
only as the lesser of two potential threats, not as a figure who can banish 
their historic insecurity. 

The emergence of a unified Germany compounds these fears. Aware 
that the two Continental giants have historically either carved up their 
neighbors or fought battles on their territory, the countries located be- 
tween them dread the emerging security vacuum; hence their intense 
desire for American protection — as expressed in NATO membership. 

If NATO is in need of adaptation to the collapse of Soviet power, the 
European Union faces the new reality of a reunified Germany, which 
threatens the tacit bargain that has been at the heart of European integra- 
tion: the Federal Republic’s acceptance of French political leadership in 
the European Community in return for a preponderant voice on eco- 
nomic matters. The Federal Republic was thus tied to the West through 
American leadership on strategic matters within NATO, and French lead- 
ership on political issues within the European Union. 

In the years ahead, all the traditional Atlantic relationships will change. 
Europe will not feel the previous need for American protection and will 
pursue its economic self-interest much more aggressively; America will 
not be willing to sacrifice as much for European security and will be 
tempted by isolationism in various guises; in due course, Germany will 
insist on the political influence to which its military and economic power 
entitle it and will not be so emotionally dependent on American military 
and French political support. 

These trends will not be fully apparent so long as Helmut Kohl, the 
heir of the Adenauer tradition (see chapter 20), is in office. Yet he repre- 
sents the last of that type of leader. The emerging generation has no 
personal recollection of the war or of America’s role in the rehabilitation 
of the devastated postwar Germany. It has no emotional reason to defer 
to supranational institutions or to subordinate its views either to America 
or to France. 

The great achievement of the postwar generation of American and 
European leaders was their recognition that, unless America was organi- 
cally involved in Europe, it would be obliged to involve itself later under 
circumstances far less favorable to both sides of the Atlantic. That is even 


821 



Diplomacy 


more true today. Germany has become so strong that existing European 
institutions cannot by themselves strike a balance between Germany and 
its European partners. Nor can Europe, even with Germany, manage by 
itself either the resurgence or the disintegration of Russia, the two most 
threatening outcomes of post-Soviet upheavals. 

It is in no country’s interest that Germany and Russia should fixate on 
each other as either principal partner or principal adversary. If they be- 
come too close, they raise fears of condominium; if they quarrel, they 
involve Europe in escalating crises. America and Europe have a joint 
interest in avoiding unbridled national German and Russian policies com- 
peting over the center of the Continent. Without America, Great Britain 
and France cannot sustain the political balance in Western Europe; Ger- 
many would be tempted by nationalism; Russia would lack a global inter- 
locutor. And without Europe, America could turn, psychologically as well 
as geographically and geopolitically, into an island off the shores of Eur- 
asia. 

The post-Cold War order confronts the North Atlantic Alliance with 
three sets of problems: internal relations within the traditional alliance 
structure; relations of the Atlantic nations to the former satellite states of 
the Soviet Union in Eastern Europe; and, finally, the relationship of the 
successor states of the Soviet Union, especially the Russian Federation, to 
the nations of the North Atlantic and to Eastern Europe. 

The adjustment of the internal relationships within the North Atlantic 
Alliance has been dominated by the perennial tug-of-war between the 
American and French views of Atlantic relationships. America has domi- 
nated NATO under the banner of integration. France, extolling European 
independence, has shaped the European Union. The result of their dis- 
agreement is that America’s role is too dominant in the military field to 
promote a European political identity, while France’s role is too insistent 
on European political autonomy to promote the cohesion of NATO. 

Intellectually, the dispute repeats the conflict between the concepts of 
Richelieu and the ideas of Wilson — between foreign policy as a balancing 
of interests and diplomacy as an affirmation of an underlying harmony. 
For America, the integrated NATO command has been the expression of 
allied unity; to France, it has been a red flag. American leaders have 
trouble understanding why a country would insist on the right to inde- 
pendent action if it did not wish to retain the option of leaving its ally in 
the lurch. France has seen in America’s uneasiness about an independent 
European military role a hidden attempt at domination. 

Each partner has, in fact, pursued a concept of international relations 
drawn from its history. France is heir of the European style of diplomacy, 


822 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


which indeed it originated over 300 years ago. Whereas Great Britain has 
had to abandon its role of guarding the balance of power, France, for 
better or worse, continues to stand for the policies of raison d'etat, and 
for the precise calculation of interests rather than the pursuit of abstract 
harmony. Just as consistently, if for a shorter period, America has prac- 
ticed Wilsonianism. Convinced of the existence of an underlying har- 
mony, America has insisted that, since European and American objectives 
were identical, European autonomy was either unnecessary or danger- 
ous. 

The two great European challenges of the contemporary period — the 
integration of a united Germany into the West and the relationship of the 
Atlantic Alliance to the new Russia — cannot be dealt with by a literal 
application of the statecraft of either Richelieu or Wilson. The Richelieu 
approach fosters the nationalism of individual European countries and 
leads to a fragmented Europe. Undiluted Wilsonianism would weaken 
the European sense of identity. The attempt to build European institutions 
based on opposition to the United States will in the end wreck both 
European unity and Atlantic cohesion. On the other hand, the United 
States need not fear an enhanced European identity within NATO because 
it is difficult to imagine autonomous European military action on any 
scale and in any area without American political and logistics support. In 
the end, it is not the integrated command that generates unity but a sense 
of shared political and security interests. 

The controversy between the United States and France, between the 
ideals of Wilson and Richelieu, has been overtaken by events. Both the 
Atlantic Alliance and the European Union are indispensable building 
blocks of a new and stable world order. NATO is the best protection 
against military blackmail from any quarter; the European Union is an 
essential mechanism for stability in Central and Eastern Europe. Both 
institutions are needed to relate the former satellites and successor states 
of the Soviet Union to a peaceful international order. 

The future of Eastern Europe and of the successor states of the Soviet 
Union are not the same problem. Eastern Europe was occupied by the 
Red Army. It has identified itself, culturally and politically, with West 
European traditions. This is especially true of the Visegrad countries of 
Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovakia. Without ties to West- 
ern Europe and Atlantic institutions, these will become a no-man’s-land 
between Germany and Russia. And for these ties to be meaningful, the 
Visegrad countries will have to belong to both the European Union and 
the Atlantic Alliance. To become economically and politically viable, they 
need the European Union; and, for security, they look to the Atlantic 


823 



Diplomacy 


Alliance. In truth, membership in one institution implies membership in 
the other. Since most members of the European Union are members of 
NATO, and since it is inconceivable that they would ignore attacks on one 
of their members after European integration has reached a certain point, 
membership in the European Union will, by one device or another, lead 
to at least de facto extension of the NATO guarantee. 

So far, the issue has been evaded because East European membership 
in both institutions has been blocked. However, the reasoning behind 
the two exclusions has been as different as that between the European 
and the American political traditions. Europe has based its decision to 
expand the European Union eastward on Realpolitik : it has accepted the 
principle and offered associate membership pending the reform of the 
East European economies (and, in the process, to shelter the economies 
of Western Europe from competition for a while longer). This would 
make ultimate membership a technical issue to be taken care of by the 
passage of time. 

The American objection to NATO membership for the Visigrad coun- 
tries is one of principle. Going back to Wilson’s historical objection to 
alliances — because they were based on the expectation of confrontation 
— President Clinton has used the occasion of a NATO summit in January 
1994 to offer an alternative vision. Explaining why the United States did 
not favor the admission of Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and 
Slovakia into NATO, he argued that the Atlantic Alliance could not afford 
to “draw a new line between East and West that could create a self- 

fulfilling prophecy of future confrontation I say to all those in Europe 

and the United States who would simply have us draw a new line in 
Europe further east that we should not foreclose the possibility of the 
best possible future for Europe, which is a democracy everywhere, a 
market economy everywhere, people cooperating everywhere for mutual 
security.” 5 

In this spirit, President Clinton put forward a scheme which he called 
the Partnership for Peace. It invites all the successor states of the Soviet 
Union and all of Moscow’s former East European satellites to join what 
amounts to a vague system of collective security. An amalgamation of 
Wilsonianism and the Wallace critique of containment described in chap- 
ter 16, it applies the principles of collective security; equating the victims 
of Soviet and Russian imperialism with its perpetrators, it gives the same 
status to Central Asian republics at the borders of Afghanistan as it does 
to Poland, the victim of four partitions in which Russia has participated. 
The Partnership for Peace is not a way station into NATO, as is often 
misleadingly asserted, but an alternative to it, just as the Locarno Treaty 


824 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


(see chapter 11) was an alternative to the British alliance which France 
sought in the 1920s. 

Yet Locarno showed that there is no middle ground between an alli- 
ance based on common purpose and a multilateral institution that is 
based not on a common perception of the threat, but on the fulfillment 
of specified conditions of domestic governance. The Partnership for 
Peace runs the risk of creating two sets of borders in Europe: those that 
are protected by security guarantees, and others where such guarantees 
have been refused — a state of affairs bound to prove tempting to potential 
aggressors and demoralizing to potential victims. Care must be taken lest, 
in the name of avoiding confrontation, a strategic and conceptual no- 
man’s-land is created in Eastern and Central Europe — the source of so 
many European conflicts. 

It will prove impossible to solve the twin problems of security for 
Eastern Europe and of integrating Russia into the international commu- 
nity as pan of the same program. If the Partnership for Peace is made an 
aspect of NATO, it may well undermine the Atlantic Alliance by diverting 
it into activities unrelated to any realistic security mission, magnify the 
sense of insecurity of Eastern Europe, and yet, being sufficiently ambigu- 
ous, fail to placate Russia. Indeed, the Partnership for Peace runs the risk 
of being treated as irrelevant, if not dangerous, by the potential victims of 
aggression while being treated in Asia as an ethnic club directed primarily 
against China and Japan. 

At the same time, relating Russia to the Atlantic nations is important. 
There is a place for an institution that calls itself the Partnership for 
Peace provided it deals with missions that all of its members interpret in 
substantially the same manner. Such common tasks exist in the field 
of economic development, education, and culture. The Conference for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) could be given expanded 
functions for these purposes, and renamed the Partnership for Peace. 

In such a design, the Atlantic Alliance would establish a common politi- 
cal framework and provide overall security; the European Union would 
accelerate membership for former Eastern European satellites; and the 
North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC) and the Conference for Secu- 
rity and Cooperation in Europe, perhaps renamed as the Partnership 
for Peace, would relate the republics of the former Soviet Union — and 
especially the Russian Federation — to the Atlantic structure. A security 
umbrella would be extended over the new democracies in Eastern Eu- 
rope. If Russia remained within its borders, the focus on security would 
shift over time to the Partnership. The common political and economic 
projects would increasingly dominate the East-West relationship. 


825 



Diplomacy 


The future of the Atlantic relationship does not reside in East-West 
relations, but in its decisive role in helping America cope with the fore- 
seeable evolution of the twenty-first century. At this writing, it is impossi- 
ble to tell which of the conceivable surging forces will be most dominant 
or most threatening, or in what combination: whether it will be Russia, 
China, or fundamentalist Islam. But America’s ability to deal with any of 
these evolutions will be enhanced by the cooperation of the nations of 
the North Atlantic. In this manner, what used to be called “out of area” 
issues will become the core of the North Atlantic relationship, which 
should be reorganized for that purpose. 

There has been a surge of American interest in Asia as symbolized by 
the proposal for a Pacific Community made by Clinton at a meeting with 
the Asian heads of government in 1993- But the term “community” ap- 
plies to Asia in only the most limited sense, for relationships in the Pacific 
are fundamentally different from those in the Atlantic area. Whereas the 
nations of Europe are grouped in common institutions, the nations of 
Asia view themselves as distinct and competitive. The relations of the 
principal Asian nations to each other bear most of the attributes of the 
European balance-of-power system of the nineteenth century. Any sig- 
nificant increase in strength by one of them is almost certain to evoke an 
offsetting maneuver by the others. 

The wild card is the attitude of the United States, which has the capacity 
— though not necessarily the philosophy — to function in much the same 
way that Great Britain did in maintaining the European balance of power 
until the two world wars of the twentieth century. The stability of the 
Asia-Pacific region, the underpinning of its vaunted prosperity, is not 
a law of nature but the consequence of an equilibrium which will 
need increasingly careful and deliberate tending in the post-Cold War 
world. 

Wilsonianism has few disciples in Asia. There is no pretense of collec- 
tive security or that cooperation should be based on shared domestic 
values, even on the pan of the few existing democracies. The emphasis is 
all on equilibrium and national interest. Military expenditures are already 
rising in all the major Asian countries. China is on the road to superpower 
status. At a growth rate of 8 percent, which is less than it has maintained 
over the 1980s, China’s Gross National Product will approach that of the 
United States by the end of the second decade of the twenty-first century. 
Long before that, China’s political and military shadow will fall over Asia 
and will affect the calculations of the other powers, however restrained 
actual Chinese policy may prove to be. The other Asian nations are likely 
to seek counterweights to an increasingly powerful China as they already 


826 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


do to Japan. Though they will disavow it, the nations of Southeast Asia are 
including the heretofore feared Vietnam in their grouping (ASEAN) 
largely in order to balance China and Japan. And that too is why ASEAN is 
asking the United States to remain engaged in their region. 

The role of Japan will inevitably be adapted to those changed circum- 
stances, though, following their national style, Japanese leaders will make 
the adjustment by the accumulation of apparently imperceptible nuances. 
During the Cold War, Japan, abandoning its historic self-reliance, basked 
in the protection of the United States. A determined economic competi- 
tor, it paid for freedom of maneuver in the economic field by subordinat- 
ing its foreign and security policies to Washington’s. So long as the Soviet 
Union could be perceived as the principal security threat by both coun- 
tries, it made sense to treat American and Japanese national interests as 
identical. 

That pattern is not likely to continue. With Korea and China gaining in 
military strength, and with the least impaired portion of Soviet military 
power located in Siberia, Japanese long-range planners will not indefi- 
nitely take the absolute identity of American and Japanese interests for 
granted. When every incoming American administration begins its term 
by proclaiming a reassessment of existing policies (or at least implying 
that they are subject to change), and when confrontation over economic 
issues becomes the rule rather than the exception, it is difficult to argue 
that American and Japanese foreign policy interests can never diverge. In 
any event, Japan’s perspective with respect to the Asian mainland differs 
from America’s because of geographic proximity and historic experience. 
Therefore, the Japanese defense budget has been creeping upward until 
it has become the third largest in the world and, given Russia’s internal 
problems, perhaps the second most effective. 

When, in 1992, then Japanese Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa was asked 
whether Japan would accept a North Korean nuclear capability, he an- 
swered with very un-Japanese directness by the single word “no.” Did 
this mean that Japan would develop its own nuclear capability? Or that it 
would seek to suppress North Korea’s? The mere fact that these questions 
can be asked suggests the possibility of a Japan cut loose, to some extent, 
from American security and foreign policy moorings. 

That even more pointed analyses would be possible with respect to the 
other major powers shows how shifting and perhaps even precarious the 
Asian equilibrium might become. To the extent that the United States 
attempts to preserve the equilibrium of Asia, it cannot wait until the 
balance is already in jeopardy. Its policy must be sufficiently flexible to 
be able to influence all available Asian forums. To some extent, this is 


827 



Diplomacy 


already happening. An auxiliary role in ASEAN (for Southeast Asia) and a 
major participation in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) have 
been established. 

But the limits of America’s influence over such multilateral institutions 
have become evident as well. Clinton’s proposal for a more institutional- 
ized Pacific Community on the European model was received with polite 
aloofness, largely because the nations of Asia do not view themselves as a 
community. They do not want an institutional framework that might give 
potential Asian superpowers — or even the United States — a major voice 
in their affairs. The nations of Asia are open to American exchanges of 
ideas; they also favor keeping America sufficiently involved so that, in an 
emergency, it can help ward off threats to their independence. But they 
are too suspicious of powerful neighbors and to some extent of the 
United States to favor formal, Pacific-wide institutions. 

America’s capacity to shape events will therefore, in the end, depend 
primarily on its bilateral relations with the major countries of Asia. This 
is why America’s policies toward both Japan and China— at this writing, 
much buffeted in controversy — assume such critical importance. For 
one thing, the American role is the key to helping Japan and China co- 
exist despite their suspicions of each other. In the immediate future, 
Japan, faced with an aging population and a stagnating economy, might 
decide to press its technological and strategic superiority before China 
emerges as a superpower and Russia recovers its strength. Afterward, it 
might have recourse to that great equalizer, nuclear technology. 

With respect to either contingency, close Japanese-American relations 
will be a vital contribution to Japanese moderation and a significant reas- 
surance to the other nations of Asia. Japanese military strength linked to 
America worries China and the other nations of Asia less than purely 
national Japanese military capabilities. And Japan will decide that it needs 
less military strength so long as an American safety net exists — even if it 
is less inclusive than previously. A substantial American military presence 
in Northeast Asia (Japan and Korea) will be needed. In its absence, Amer- 
ica’s commitment to a permanent role in Asia would lack credibility, and 
Japan and China would be increasingly tempted to pursue national 
courses of action which, in the end, could well be directed against each 
other and all the buffer states in between. 

Revitalizing and clarifying Japanese-American relations on the basis of 
parallel geopolitical interests will face major obstacles. The economic 
disagreements are familiar; the cultural obstacles may prove even more 
insidious. These are most painfully — and sometimes maddeningly — evi- 
dent in the different national approaches to decision-making. America 


828 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


decides on the basis of status; somebody in authority, usually the presi- 
dent, occasionally the secretary of state, selects his preferred course from 
the available options, more or less by dint of his position. Japan operates 
by consensus. No single person — not even the prime minister — has the 
authority to make a decision. Everyone who must carry out the decision 
participates in the formation of the consensus, which is not considered 
complete until all have agreed. 

All of this practically guarantees that, at meetings between an American 
president and a Japanese prime minister, substantive differences are com- 
pounded by misunderstanding. When the American president expresses 
agreement, he is foreshadowing action; when the Japanese prime minis- 
ter assents, he is conveying an attitude which implies not so much that he 
agrees with the American position as that he has understood it and will 
submit it to his consensus group. He presumes it is clear that his authority 
does not extend beyond that. For negotiations on Asia’s future to thrive, 
America requires greater patience, and Japan must put itself in a position 
to discuss meaningfully long-range policies on which the future coopera- 
tion ultimately depends. 

In a curious way, the firmness of Japanese-American relations will be 
the reverse side of the Sino-American relationship. Despite a consider- 
able affinity for Chinese culture, Japan has been torn between admiration 
and fear, between the desire for friendship and the urge to dominate. 
Sino-American tension tempts Japan to dissociate from the United States 
in an effort, if not to enhance its influence in China, at least not to 
diminish it by following the American lead too closely. At the same time, 
a purely national Japanese approach runs the risk of being interpreted in 
Beijing as an expression of the Japanese appetite for domination. Good 
American relations with China are therefore the prerequisite for good 
long-term relations with Japan, as well as for good Sino-Japanese rela- 
tions. It is a triangle which each of the parties can abandon only at great 
risk. It is also an ambiguity with which the United States is not totally 
comfortable, since it runs counter to the American tendency to label 
nations neatly as either friend or foe. 

Of all the great, and potentially great, powers, China is the most ascen- 
dant. The United States already is the most powerful, Europe must work 
to forge greater unity, Russia is a staggering giant, and Japan is wealthy 
but, so far, timid. China, however, with economic growth rates ap- 
proaching 10 percent annually, a strong sense of national cohesion, and 
an ever more muscular military, will show the greatest relative increase 
in stature among the major powers. In 1943, Roosevelt had envisioned 
China as one of the “Four Policemen,” but China soon thereafter sank 


829 



Diplomacy 


into the turmoil of civil war. The Maoist China which emerged was intent 
on being an independent great power, but was frustrated by its ideologi- 
cal blinkers. Having put the ideological convulsions behind them, China’s 
reformist leaders have pursued Chinese national interest with skillful 
tenacity. A policy of confrontation with China risks America’s isolation in 
Asia. No Asian country would want to be — or could afford to be — sup- 
portive of America in any political conflict with China which it considered 
to be the result of misguided United States policy. In such circumstances, 
the vast majority of Asian nations would dissociate from America to a 
greater or a lesser degree, however much they might inwardly dislike 
doing so. For nearly every country looks to America to create a stable, 
long-term framework which will integrate both China and Japan — an 
option which is forfeited vis-a-vis both countries by Sino-American con- 
frontation. 

As the nation with the longest history of independent foreign policy 
and a tradition of basing its foreign policy on national interest, China 
welcomes American involvement in Asia as a counterweight to its feared 
neighbors, Japan and Russia, and — to a lesser degree — India. Yet an 
American policy that seeks simultaneously friendship with Beijing as well 
as with countries that are perceived as potential threats to Chinese secu- 
rity in Beijing — which is the correct U.S. stance — requires a careful and 
regular dialogue between Washington and Beijing. 

For four years after the events of Tiananmen Square in 1989, this dia- 
logue was inhibited by the American refusal to engage in high-level con- 
tacts — a measure never employed against the Soviet Union even at the 
height of the Cold War. Human rights thus moved to the center of the 
Sino-American relationship. 

The Clinton Administration wisely restored high-level contacts; the fu- 
ture of Sino-American relations henceforth depends essentially on the 
substance of these exchanges. Clearly, the United States cannot abandon 
its traditional concern with human rights and democratic values. The 
problem is not America’s advocacy of its values but the degree to which 
all aspects of Sino-American relations are made conditional on them. 
China finds condescending the implication that Sino-American relations 
are based not on reciprocal interests but on American favors which can 
be pursued or shut off at Washington’s discretion. Such an attitude makes 
America appear both unreliable and intrusive, and unreliability is the 
greater failing in Chinese eyes. 

For China, a country historically pre-eminent in its region — indeed, in 
the world known to it — any attempt to prescribe its institutions and do- 
mestic practices would cause deep resentment. This general sensitivity is 


830 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


magnified by the Chinese view of the West’s involvement in its history. 
Ever since the Opium Wars of the early nineteenth century forcibly 
opened up the country, the West has been viewed by the Chinese as the 
agent of an endless series of humiliations. Equality of status, a fierce 
insistence on not bowing to foreign prescription, is for Chinese leaders 
not a tactic but a moral imperative. 

What China seeks from the United States is a strategic relationship to 
balance neighbors it considers to be both powerful and covetous. To 
achieve this level of foreign policy coordination, China might be prepared 
to make some human-rights concessions, provided they can be presented 
as emerging from its own free choice. But American insistence on pub- 
licly prescribing conditions is perceived in China both as an attempt to 
convert its society to American values — hence humiliating — and as a lack 
of American seriousness. For it suggests that America has no national 
interest in the Asian equilibrium as such. But if America cannot be 
counted on for that purpose, China will have no interest in making con- 
cessions to it. The key to Sino-American relations — paradoxically, even 
on human rights — is a tacit cooperation on global, and especially Asian, 
strategy. 

With respect to Europe, America shares a community of values but has 
not yet been able to devise a common policy or adequate institutions for 
the post-Cold War period; with respect to Asia, it is possible for America 
to define a desirable overall strategy but not a community of values. 
However, quite unexpectedly, a confluence of moral and geopolitical 
aims, of Wilsonianism and Realpolitik, is emerging in the Western Hemi- 
sphere. 

The United States’ early foreign policy in the Western Hemisphere was 
essentially one of Great Power interventionism. Franklin Roosevelt’s 
Good Neighbor policy, announced in 1933, marked the turn toward coop- 
eration. The Rio Treaty of 1947 and the Pact of Bogota of 1948 provided 
a security component that was institutionalized in the Organization of 
American States. President Kennedy’s 1961 Alliance for Progress intro- 
duced foreign aid and economic cooperation, though the farsighted pol- 
icy was doomed by the statist orientation of the recipients. 

During the Cold War, most of the nations of Latin America were gov- 
erned by authoritarian, largely military, governments committed to state 
control of their economies. Starting in the mid-1980s, Latin America 
shook off its economic paralysis and began to advance with remarkable 
unanimity toward democracy and market economics. Brazil, Argentina, 
and Chile abandoned military government in favor of democratic rule. 
Central America ended its civil wars. Bankrupted by mindless borrowing, 


831 



Diplomacy 


Latin America submitted itself to financial disciplines. Nearly everywhere, 
state-dominated economies were progressively opened to market 
forces. 

The Enterprise for the Americas Initiative announced by Bush in 1990, 
and the battle for a North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico 
and Canada successfully concluded by Clinton in 1993, represent the 
most innovative American policy toward Latin America in history. After a 
series of ups and downs, the Western Hemisphere seems on the verge of 
turning into a key element of a new and humane global order. A group 
of democratic nations has pledged itself to popular governments, market 
economies, and hemisphere-wide free trade. The sole Marxist dictator- 
ship remaining in the Western Hemisphere is Cuba; everywhere else, 
nationalistic, protectionist methods of economic management are being 
replaced by free economies hospitable to foreign investment and sup- 
portive of open international trading systems. Emphasizing reciprocal 
obligations and cooperative action, the ultimate and dramatic goal is the 
creation of a free-trade area from Alaska to Cape Horn — a concept that, 
a short time ago, would have been considered hopelessly utopian. 

A Western Hemisphere-wide free-trade system — with NAFTA as the 
initial step — would give the Americas a commanding role no matter what 
happens. If the principles of the Uruguay Round of the General 
Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) negotiated in 1993 in fact prevail, 
the Western Hemisphere will be a major participant in global economic 
growth. If discriminatory regional groupings dominate, the Western 
Hemisphere, with its vast market, will be able to compete effectively with 
other regional trading blocs; indeed, NAFTA is the most effective means 
to forestall such a contest or to prevail in it should it occur. By offering 
associate membership to nations outside the Western Hemisphere that 
are prepared to observe its principles, an expanded NAFTA could create 
incentives to abide by free trade, and penalize nations insisting on more 
restrictive rules. In a world where America is often obliged to strike a 
balance between its values and its necessities, it has discovered that its 
ideals and its geopolitical objectives mesh substantially in the Western 
Hemisphere, where its aspirations originated and its first major foreign 
policy initiatives were conducted. 


In launching itself for the third time in this century on creating a new 
world order, America’s dominant task is to strike a balance between the 
twin temptations inherent in its exceptionalism: the notion that America 
must remedy every wrong and stabilize every dislocation, and the latent 


832 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


instinct to withdraw into itself. Indiscriminate involvement in all the eth- 
nic turmoil and civil wars of the post-Cold War world would drain a 
crusading America. Yet an America that confines itself to the refinement 
of its domestic virtues would, in the end, abdicate America’s security and 
prosperity to decisions made by other societies in faraway places and 
over which America would progressively lose control. 

When, in 1821, John Quincy Adams warned Americans against the pen- 
chant to slay “distant monsters,” he could not have imagined the sheer 
number and magnitude of monsters that would exist in the post-Cold 
War world. Not every evil can be combated by America, even less by 
America alone. But some monsters need to be, if not slain, at least re- 
sisted. What is most needed are criteria for selectivity. 

America’s leaders have generally stressed motivation over structure. 
They have placed more emphasis on affecting the attitudes than the calcu- 
lations of their counterparts. As a result, American society is peculiarly 
ambivalent about the lessons of history. American films often depict how 
some dramatic event transforms a villain into a paragon of virtue (some- 
times cloyingly so) — a reflection of the pervasive national belief that the 
past has no final claim and that new departures are always possible. In 
the real world, such transformations are rarely observed in individuals, 
even less so among nations which are composites of many individual 
choices. 

The rejection of history extols the image of a universal man living by 
universal maxims, regardless of the past, of geography, or of other immu- 
table circumstance. Since the American tradition emphasizes universal 
truths rather than national characteristics, American policymakers have 
generally preferred multilateral approaches to national ones: the agendas 
of disarmament, nonproliferation, and human rights rather than essen- 
tially national, geopolitical, or strategic issues. 

The American refusal to be bound by history and the insistence on the 
perpetual possibility for renewal confer a great dignity, even beauty, on 
the American way of life. The national fear that those who are obsessed 
with history produce self-fulfilling prophecies does embody a great folk 
wisdom. Still, Santayana’s dictum that those who ignore history are con- 
demned to repeat it can be supported by even more examples. 

A country with America’s idealistic tradition cannot base its policy on 
the balance of power as the sole criterion for a new world order. But it 
must learn that equilibrium is a fundamental precondition for the pursuit 
of its historic goals. And these higher goals cannot be achieved by rhetoric 
or posturing. The emerging international system is far more complex 
than any previously encountered by American diplomacy. Foreign policy 


833 



Diplomacy 


has to be conducted by a political system that emphasizes the immediate 
and provides few incentives for the long range. Its leaders are obliged to 
deal with constituencies that tend to receive their information via visual 
images. All this puts a premium on emotion and on the mood of the 
moment at a time that demands rethinking of priorities and an analysis of 
capabilities. 

History, however, will not excuse failure by the magnitude of the task. 
What America must master is the transition from an age when all choices 
seemed open to a period when it can still accomplish more than any 
other society if it can only learn its limits. Through most of its history, 
America knew no foreign threat to its survival. When such a threat finally 
emerged during the Cold War, it was utterly defeated. The American 
experience has thus encouraged the belief that America, alone among the 
nations of the world, is impervious and that it can prevail by the example 
of its virtues and good works. 

In the post-Cold War world, such an attitude would turn innocence 
into self-indulgence. At a time when America is able neither to dominate 
the world nor to withdraw from it, when it finds itself both all-powerful 
and totally vulnerable, it must not abandon the ideals which have ac- 
counted for its greatness. But neither must it jeopardize that greatness by 
fostering illusions about the extent of its reach. World leadership is inher- 
ent in America’s power and values, but it does not include the privilege 
of pretending that America is doing other nations a kindness by associat- 
ing with them, or that it has a limitless capacity to impose its will by 
withholding its favors. For America, any association with Realpolitik must 
take into account the core values of the first society in history to have 
been explicitly created in the name of liberty. Yet America’s survival and 
progress will depend as well on its ability to make choices which reflect 
contemporary reality. Otherwise, foreign policy will turn into self-righ- 
teous posturing. The relative weight to be given to each of these compo- 
nents and the price associated with every priority define both the 
challenge and the stature of political leaders. What no leader must ever 
do is to suggest that choice has no price, or that no balance needs to be 
struck. 

In traveling along the road to world order for the third time in the 
modern era, American idealism remains as essential as ever, perhaps 
even more so. But in the new world order, its role will be to provide the 
faith to sustain America through all the ambiguities of choice in an imper- 
fect world. Traditional American idealism must combine with a thoughtful 
assessment of contemporary realities to bring about a usable definition 
of American interests. In the past, American foreign policy efforts were 


834 



The New World Order Reconsidered 


inspired by utopian visions of some terminal point after which the under- 
lying harmony of the world would simply reassert itself. 

Henceforth, few such final outcomes are in prospect; the fulfillment of 
America’s ideals will have to be sought in the patient accumulation of 
partial successes. The certitudes of physical threat and hostile ideology 
characteristic of the Cold War are gone. The convictions needed to master 
the emerging world order are more abstract: a vision of a future that 
cannot be demonstrated when it is put forward and judgments about 
the relationship between hope and possibility that are, in their essence, 
conjectural. The Wilsonian goals of America’s past — peace, stability, prog- 
ress, and freedom for mankind — will have to be sought in a journey that 
has no end. “Traveler,” says a Spanish proverb, “there are no roads. Roads 
are made by walking.” 


835 



Notes 


CHAPTER TWO 

The Hinge: Theodore Roosevelt or Woodrow Wilson 

1. Robert W. Tucker and David C. Hendrickson, “Thomas Jefferson and American Foreign 
Policy/’ Foreign Affairs, vol. 69, no. 2 (Spring 1990), p. 148. 

2. Thomas G. Paterson, j. Garry Clifford, and Kenneth J. Hagan, American Foreign Policy: 
A History (Lexington, Mass.: D. C. Heath, 1977), p. 60. 

3. Tucker and Hendrickson, “Thomas Jefferson,” p. 140, quoting from Letters and Other 
Writings of James Madison (Philadelphia: j. B. Lippincott, 1865), vol. IV, pp. 491-92. 

4. James Monroe quoted in William A. Williams, ed., The Shaping of American Diplomacy 
(Chicago: Rand McNally, 1956), vol. I, p. 122. 

5. George Washington’s Farewell Address, September 17, 1796, reprinted as Senate Docu- 
ment no. 3, 102nd Cong., 1st sess. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
1991), p. 24. 

6. Jefferson letter to Mme. La Duchesse D’Auville, April 2, 1790, in Paul Leicester Ford, ed., 
The Writings of Jefferson (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1892-99), vol. V, p. 153, quoted 
in Tucker and Hendrickson, “Thomas Jefferson,” p. 139- 

7. Thomas Paine, Rights of Man (1791) (Secaucus, N.J.: Citadel Press, 1974), p. 147. 

8. Alexander Hamilton, “The Federalist No. 6,” in Edward Mead Earle, ed., The Federalist 
(New York: Modern Library, 1941), pp. 30-31. 

9. Jefferson letter to John Dickinson, March 6, 1801, in Adrienne Koch and William Peden, 


837 



Notes 


eds., The Life and Selected Writings of Thomas Jefferson (New York: Modern Library, 1944), 
p. 561. 

10 . Jefferson letter to Joseph Priestley, June 19, 1802, in Ford, ed., Writings of Thomas 
Jefferson, vol. VIII, pp. 158-59, quoted in Robert W. Tucker and David C. Hendrickson, 
Empire of Liberty: The Statecraft of Thomas Jefferson (New York/Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1990), p. 11. 

11 . Tucker and Hendrickson, “Thomas Jefferson,” p. 141. 

12 . John Quincy Adams, Address of July 4, 1821, in Walter LaFeber, ed ., John Quincy 
Adams and American Continental Empire (Chicago: Times Books, 1965), p. 45. 

13 . Message of President Monroe to Congress, December 2, 1823, in Ruhl J. Bartlett, ed, 
The Record of American Diplomacy (New York: Alfred A Knopf, 1956), p. 182. 

14 . Ibid. 

15 . President James Polk, Inaugural Address, March 4, 1845, in The Presidents Speak, annot. 
by David Newton Lott (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969), p. 95. 

16. Quoted in Williams, Shaping of American Diplomacy, vol. 1, p. 315. 

17 . See Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers (New York: Random House, 
1987), p. 201 and pp. 242ff; also, Fareed Zakaria, “The Rise of a Great Power, National 
Strength, State Structure, and American Foreign Policy 1865-1908” (unpublished doctoral 
thesis, Harvard University, 1992), chapter 3, pp. 4ff. 

18 . Zakaria, ibid., pp. 7-8. 

19 . Ibid., p. 71. 

20 . Paterson, Clifford, and Hagan, eds., American Foreign Policy, p. 189. 

21 . President Roosevelt’s Annual Message to Congress, December 6, 1904, in Bartlett, ed., 
Record of American Diplomacy, p. 539. 

22 . Roosevelt’s statement to Congress, 1902, quoted in John Morton Blum, The Republican 
Roosevelt (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1967), p. 127. 

23 . Ibid., p. 137. 

24 . Roosevelt letter to Hugo Munsterberg, October 3, 1914, in Elting E. Morison, ed., The 
Letters of Theodore Roosevelt (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1954), vol. VIII, 
pp. 824-25. 

25. Blum, Republican Roosevelt, p. 131. 

26 . Selections from the Correspondence of Theodore Roosevelt and Henry Cabot Lodge 
1884-1918, ed. by Henry Cabot Lodge and Charles F. Redmond (New York/London: 
Charles Scribners Sons, 1925), vol. II, p. 162. 

27 . Blum , Republican Roosevelt, p. 135. 

28 . Ibid., p. 134. 

29 . Quoted in John Milton Cooper, Jr., Pivotal Decades: The United States, 1900-1920 
(New York/London: W. W. Norton, 1990), p. 103. 

30 . Blum, Republican Roosevelt, p. 134. 

31 . Roosevelt, in Outlook, vol. 107 (August 22, 1914), p. 1012. 

32 . Roosevelt to Munsterberg, October 3, 1914, in Morison, ed., Letters of Theodore Roose- 
velt, p. 823. 

33 . Roosevelt to Cecil Arthur Spring Rice, October 3, 1914, in ibid., p. 821. 

34 . Roosevelt to Rudyard Kipling, November 4, 1914, in Robert Endicott Osgood, Ideals 
and Self-Interest in America’s Foreign Relations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1953), p. 137. 

35 . Woodrow Wilson, Annual Message to Congress on the State of the Union, December 
2, 1913, in Arthur S. Link, ed., The Papers of Woodrow Wilson (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1966- ) vol. 29, p. 4. 

36 . Roosevelt letter to a friend, December 1914, in Osgood, Ideals and Self-Interest, 
p. 144. 

37 . Woodrow Wilson, Annual Message to Congress, December 8, 1914, in Link, ed., Papers 
of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 31, p. 423. 

38 . Ibid., p. 422. 

39 . Woodrow Wilson, Commencement Address at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, 
June 13, 1916, in ibid., vol. 37, pp. 212ff. 


838 



Notes 


40 . Woodrow Wilson, Remarks to Confederate Veterans in Washington, June 5, 1917, in 
ibid., vol. 42, p. 453. 

41 . Woodrow Wilson, Annual Message to Congress on the State of the Union, December 
7, 1915, in ibid. , vol. 35, p. 297. 

42 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address in the Princess Theater, Cheyenne, Wyoming, Septem- 
ber 24, 1919, in ibid., vol. 63, p. 474. 

43 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address to a Joint Session of Congress, April 2, 1917, in ibid, 
vol. 41, pp. 526-27. 

44 . Ibid., p. 523. 

45 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address to the Senate, January 22, 1917, in ibid., vol. 40, p. 536. 

46 . Selig Adler, The Isolationist Impulse: Its Twentieth-Century Reaction (London/New 
York: Abelard Schuman, 1957), p. 36. 

47 . Ibid 

48 . Woodrow Wilson, Address, April 2, 1917, in Link, ed., Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 
41, pp. 519ff. 

49 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address in Boston, February 24, 1919, in ibid., vol. 55, pp. 242-43. 

50 . Woodrow Wilson, Address, January 22, 1917, in ibid., vol. 40, pp. 536-37. 

51 . See Chapter 6. 

52 . Woodrow Wilson, Remarks at Suresnes Cemetery on Memorial Day, May 30, 1919, in 
ibid., vol. 59, pp. 608-9. 

53 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address Before the League to Enforce Peace, May 27, 1916, in 
ibid., vol. 37, pp. 113ff. 

54 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address at Mt. Vernon, July 4, 1918, in ibid., vol. 48, p. 516. 

55 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address to the Third Plenary Session of the Peace Conference, 
February 14, 1919, in ibid, vol. 55, p. 175. 

56 . Roosevelt letter to James Bryce, November 19, 1918, in Morison, ed., Letters of Theo- 
dore Roosevelt, vol. VIII, p. 1400. 

57 . Roosevelt to Senator Philander Chase Knox (R.-Pa.), December 6, 1918, in ibid., 
pp. 1413-14. 


CHAPTER THREE 

From Universality to Equilibrium: Richelieu, William of Orange, 

and Pitt 

1. Louis Auchincloss, Richelieu (New York: Viking Press, 1972), p. 256. 

2 . In Quellenbuch zur Osterreichische Geschichte, vol. II, edited by Otto Frass (Vienna: 
Birken Verlag, 1959), p. 100. 

3 . Ibid. 

4 . Ibid. 

5 . Ibid. 

6. Joseph Strayer, Hans Gatzke, and E. Harris Harbison, The Mainstream of Civilization 
Since 1500 (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971), p. 420. 

7 . Quoted in Carl J. Burckhardt , Richelieu and His Age, trans., from the German by Bernard 
Hoy (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1970), vol. Ill, “Power Politics and the 
Cardinal’s Death,” p. 6l. 

8. Ibid., p. 122. 

9 . Jansenius, Mars Gallicus, in William F. Church, Richelieu and Reason of State (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1972), p. 388. 

10 . Daniel de Priezac, Defence des Droits et Prerogatives des Roys de France, in ibid., 
p. 398. 

11 . Mathieu de Morgues, Catholicon frangois, treatise of 1636, in ibid, p. 37 6. 

12 . Albert Sorel, Europe Under the Old Regime, trans. by Francis H. Herrick (Los Angeles: 
Ward Ritchie Press, 1947), p. 10. 

13 . In F. H. Hinsley, Power and the Pursuit of Peace (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1963), pp. 162-63. 

14 . Ibid., p. 162. 


839 



Notes 


15 . Ibid., p. 166. 

16. Quoted in Gordon A. Craig and Alexander L. George, Force and Statecraft (New York/ 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), p. 20. 

17 . G. C. Gibbs, “The Revolution in Foreign Policy,” in Geoffrey Holmes, ed., Britain After 
the Glorious Revolution, 1689-1714 (London: Macmillan, 1969), p. 61. 

18 . Winston S. Churchill, The Gathering Storm, The Second World War, vol. 1 (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1948), p. 208. 

19 . Quoted in Gibbs, “Revolution,” in Holmes, ed., Britain After the Glorious Revolution, 
p. 62. 

20 . Speech by Secretary of State, Lord John Carteret, Earl of Granville, in the House of 
Lords, January 27, 1744, in Joel H. Wiener, ed., Great Britain: Foreign Policy and the Span 
of Empire, 1689-1971, vol. 1 (New York/London: Chelsea House in association with 
McGraw-Hill, 1972), pp. 84-86. 

21 . Churchill, Gathering Storm, p. 208. 

22 . Pitt Plan in Sir Charles Webster, ed., British Diplomacy 1813-1815 (London: G. Bell 
and Sons, 1921), pp. 389ff. 


CHAPTER FOUR 

The Concert of Europe: Great Britain, Austria, and Russia 

1. Sir Thomas Overbury, “Observations on His Travels,” in Stuart Tracts 1603-1693 , 
edited by C. H. Firth (London: Constable, 1903), p- 227, quoted in Martin Wight, Power 
Politics (New York: Holmes and Meier, 1978), p. 173. 

2 . Memorandum of Lord Castlereagh, August 12, 1815, in C. K. Webster, ed., British Diplo- 
macy, 1813-1815 (London: G. Bell and Sons, 1921), pp. 361-62. 

3 . Talleyrand, in Harold Nicolson, The Congress of Vienna (New York/San Diego/London: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, paper ed., 1974), p. 155. 

4. Wilhelm Schwarz, Die Heilige Allianz (Stuttgart, 1935), pp. 52ff. 

5 . Quoted in Asa Briggs, The Age of Improvement 1783-1867 (London: Longmans, 1959), 
p. 345. 

6. Klemens Metternich, Aus Mettemich’s Nachgelassenen Papieren (8 vols,), edited by 
Alfons von Klinkowstroem (Vienna, 1880), vol. VIII, pp. 557fF. 

7 . The material in these pages draws on the author’s A World Restored: Metternich, Cas- 
tlereagh and the Problems of Peace 1812-1822 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1973 Sentry 
Edition). 

8 . Quoted in ibid., p. 321. 

9 . Quoted in Wilhelm Oncken, Osterreich und Preussen im Befreiungskriege, 2 vols. (Ber- 
lin, 1880), vol. II, pp. 630ff. 

10 . Metternich, Nachgelassenen Papieren, vol. VIII, p. 365. 

11 . Quoted in Oncken, Osterreich und Preussen, vol. I, pp. 439ff. 

12 . Metternich, Nachgelassenen Papieren, vol. I, pp. 3l6ff. 

13 . Quoted in Nicholas Mikhailovitch, Les Rapports Diplomatiques du Lebzeltem (St. Pe- 
tersburg, 1915), pp. 37ff. 

14. Quoted in Schwarz, Die Heilige Allianz, p. 234. 

15 . Quoted in Alfred Stern, Geschichte Europas seit den Vertrdgen von 1815 bis zum 
Frankfurter Frieden von 1871, 10 vols. (Munich-Berlin, 1913-24), vol. I, p. 298. 

16 . Quoted in Hans Schmalz, Versuche einer Gesamteuropdischen Organisation, 1815- 
20 (Bern, 1940), p. 66. 

17 . Lord Castlereagh’s Confidential State Paper, May 5, 1820, in Sir A. W. Ward and G. P. 
Gooch, eds., The Cambridge History of British Foreign Policy, 1783-1919 (New York: 
Macmillan, 1923), vol. II (1815-66), p. 632. 

18 . Viscount Castlereagh, Correspondence, Dispatches and Other Papers, 12 vols., edited 
by his brother, the Marquess of Londonderry (London, 1848-52), vol. XII, p. 394. 

19 . Quoted in Sir Charles Webster, The Foreign Policy of Castlereagh, 2 vols. (London, 
1925 and 1931), vol. II, p. 366. 

20 . Quoted in Briggs, Age of Improvement, p. 346. 

21 . Quoted in Webster, Foreign Policy of Castlereagjo, vol. II, pp. 303ff. 


840 



Notes 


22. Castlereagh’s Confidential State Paper of May 5, 1820, in Ward and Gooch, eds., Cam- 
bridge History, vol. II, pp. 626-27. 

23. Quoted in Kissinger, A World Restored, p. 311. 

24. Quoted in A. J. P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe 1848-1918 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1963), p. 54. 

25. Canning, quoted in R. W. Seton-Watson, Britain in Europe, 1789-1914 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1955), p. 74. 

26. Ibid. 

27. Canning s Plymouth speech of October 28, 1823, in ibid, p. 119. 

28. Palmerston to Clarendon, July 20, 1856, quoted in Harold Temperley and Lillian M. 
Penson, Foundations of British Foreign Policy from Pitt (1792) to Salisbury (1902) (Cam- 
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1938), p. 88. 

29. Sir Edward Grey, in Seton-Watson, Britain in Europe, p. 1. 

30. Palmerston, in Briggs, Age of Improvement, p. 352. 

31. Palmerston’s dispatch no. 6 to the Marquis of Clanricarde (Ambassador in St. Peters- 
burg), January 11, 1841, in Temperley and Penson, Foundations of Foreign Policy >, 
p. 136. 

32. Ibid., p. 137. 

33. Gladstone letter to Queen Victoria, April 17, 1869, in Harold Nicolson, Diplomacy 
(London: Oxford University 7 Press, 1963), p. 137. 

34. Palmerston, in Briggs, Age of Improvement, p. 357. 

35. Disraeli to the House of Commons, August 1, 1870, in Parliamentary Debates (Han- 
sard), 3rd ser., vol. cciii (London: Cornelius Buck, 1870), col. 1289. 

36. Palmerston to House of Commons, July 21, 1849, in Temperley and Penson, Founda- 
tions of Foreign Policy, p. 173. 

37. Palmerston, in Briggs, Age of Improvement, p. 353. 

38. Clarendon to the House of Lords, March 31, 1854, quoted in Seton-Watson, Britain in 
Europe, p. 327. 

39. Palmerston to House of Commons, July 21, 1849, in Temperley and Penson, Founda- 
tions of Foreign Policy, p. 176. 

40. Quoted in Joel H. Wiener, ed., Great Britain. Foreign Policy and the Span of Empire 
1689-1971 (New York/London: Chelsea House in association with McGraw-Hill, 1972), 
p. 404. 

41. Metternich, June 30, 1841, in Seton-Watson, Britain in Europe, p. 221. 

CHAPTER FIVE 

Two Revolutionaries: Napoleon III and Bismarck 

1. Joseph Alexander, Graf von Hiibner, Neun Jahre der Errinerungen eines oster- 
reichischen Botschafters in Paris unter dem zweiten Kaiserreich, 1851-1859 (Berlin, 1904) 
vol. I, p. 109. 

2. Ibid, p. 93. 

3. Hiibner to Franz Josef, September 23, 1857, in Hiibner, Neun Jahre, vol. II, p. 31. 

4. William E. Echard, Napoleon III and the Concert of Europe (Baton Rouge, La.: Louisiana 
State University 7 Press, 1983), p. 72. 

5. Ibid., p. 2. 

6. Napoleon III to Franz Josef, June 17, 1866, in Hermann Oncken, ed., Die Rheinpolitik 
Napoleons III (Berlin, 1926), vol. I, p. 280. 

7. Franz Josef to Napoleon III, June 24, 1866, in ibid., p. 284. 

8 . Quoted in A J. P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe 1848-1918 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1954), p. 102. 

9. Hiibner to Ferdinand Buol, April 9, 1858, in Hiibner, Neun Jahre, vol. II, p. 82. 

10. Ibid., p. 93. 

11. Drouyn de Lhuys to La Tour d’Auvergne, June 10, 1864, in Origines Diplomatiques de 
la Guerre de 1870/71 (Paris: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 1910-30), vol. Ill, p. 203. 

12. Quoted in Wilfried Radewahn, “Franzosische Aussenpolitik vor dem Krieg von 1870,” 
in Eberhard Kolb, ed., Europa vor dem Krieg von 1870 (Munich, 1983), p. 38. 


841 



Notes 


13. Quoted in Wilfried Radewahn, Die Pariser Presse und die Deutsche Frage (Frankfurt, 
1977), p. 104. 

14. Goltz to Bismarck, February 17, 1866, on conversation with Napoleon III, in Oncken, 
ed., Rheinpolitik, vol. I, p. 90. 

15 . Quoted in Radewahn, Pariser Presse, p. 110. 

16 . Goltz to Bismarck, April 25, 1866, in Oncken, ed, Rheinpolitik , vol. I, p. 140. 

17 . Quoted by Talleyrand to Drouyn, May 7, 1866, in Origines Diplomatiques, vol. EX, 
p. 47. 

18 . Thiers speech, May 3, 1866, in Oncken, ed., Rheinpolitik, vol. I, pp. 154ff. 

19 . Ibid. 

20 . Quoted in Taylor, Struggle for Mastery, p. 163. 

21 . Ibid., pp. 205-6. 

22 . The analysis of Bismarck’s political thought draws on the author’s “The White Revolu- 
tionary: Reflections on Bismarck,” in Daedalus, vol. 97, no. 3 (Summer 1968), pp. 888- 
924. 

23. Horst Kohl, ed., Die politischen Reden des Fursten Bismarck, Historische-Kritische 
Gesamtausgabe (Stuttgart, 1892), vol. 1, pp. 267-68. 

24 . Otto von Bismarck, Die gesammelten Werke (Berlin, 1924), vol. 2, pp. I39ff. 

25 . Briefwechsel des Generals von Gerlach mit dem Bundestags- Gesandten Otto von Bis- 
marck (Berlin, 1893), p. 315 (April 28, 1856). 

26 . Otto Kohl, ed., Brief e des Generals Leopold von Gerlach an Otto von Bismarck (Stutt- 
gart and Berlin, 1912), pp. 192-93. 

27. Briefwechsel, p. 315- 

28 . Kohl, ed., Brief e, p. 206. 

29 . Ibid., p. 211 (May 6, 1857). 

30 . Briefwechsel, pp. 333-34. 

31 . Ibid. 

32 . Ibid, p. 353. 

33 . Ibid. 

34. Bismarck, Werke, vol. 1, p. 375 (September 1853). 

35 . Ibid., vol. 2, p. 320 (March 1858). 

36. Briefwechsel, p. 334. 

37 . Ibid, p. 130 (February 20, 1854). 

38 . Bismarck, Werke, vol. 1, p. 62 (September 29, 1851). 

39 . Briefwechsel, p. 334 (May 2, 1857). 

40. Ibid., p. 128 (December 19, 1853). 

41 . Ibid., p. 194 (October 13, 1854). 

42 . Bismarck, Werke, vol. 14 (3rd ed., Berlin, 1924), no. 1, p. 517. 

43. Briefwechsel, p. 199 (October 19, 1854). 

44. Bismarck, Werke, vol. 2, p. 516 (December 8-9, 1859). 

45 . Ibid., p. 139 (April 26, 1856). 

46. Ibid., pp. 139ff. 

47 . Ibid. 

48 . Ibid. 

49 . Otto Pflanze, Bismarck and the Development of Germany. The Period of Unification, 
1815-1871 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1990), p. 85. 

50 . Quoted in J. A. S. Grenville, Europe Reshaped, 1848-1878 (Sussex: Harvester Press, 
1976), p. 358. 

51 . Bismarck, Werke, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 61. 

52 . Emil Ludwig, Bismarck: Geschichte eines Kdmpfers (Berlin, 1926), p. 494. 

CHAPTER SIX 

Realpolitik Turns on Itself 

1. Report of Laurent Berenger from St. Petersburg, September 3, 1762, in George Vernad- 
sky, ed., A Source Book for Russian History: From Early Times to 1917,5 vols. (New Haven, 
Conn.: Yale University Press, 1972), vol. 2, p. 397. 


842 



Notes 


2 . Friedrich von Gentz, “Considerations on the Political System in Europe” (1818), in 
Mack Walker, ed., Mettemich s Europe (New York: Walker and Co., 1968), p. 80. 

3 . V. O. Kliuchevsky, A Course in Russian History: The Seventeenth Century , trans. by 
Natalie Duddington (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1968), p. 97. 

4 . Potemkin memorandum, in Vernadsky, ed., Source Book, vol. 2, p. 411. 

5 . Gorchakov memorandum, in ibid., vol. 3, p. 610. 

6. Gentz, “Considerations,” in Walker, ed., Mettemich's Europe, p. 80. 

7. M. N. Katkov, editorial of May 10, 1883, in Vernadsky, ed., Source Book, vol. 3, p. 67 6. 

8. F. M. Dostoyevsky, in ibid., vol. 3, p- 681. 

9. Katkov, editorial of September 7, 1882, in ibid., vol. 3, p. 676. 

10 . Quoted in B. H. Sumner, Russia and the Balkans, 1870-1880 (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1957), p. 72. 

11 . George F. Kennan, “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 25, no. 4 
(July 1947). 

12 . Otto von Bismarck, quoted in Gordon A. Craig, Germany 1866-1945 (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1978), p. 117. 

13 . Quoted in Robert Blake, Disraeli (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1966), p. 574. 

14 . George F. Kennan, Decline of Bismarck's European Order (Princeton: Princeton Uni- 
versity Press, 1979), p. 1 Iff. 

15 . Ibid. 

16 . Bismarck, February 19, 1878, in Horst Kohl, ed., Politische Reden, vol. 7 (Aalen, West 
Germany: Scientia Verlag, 1970), p. 94. 

17 . A. J. P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe 1848-1918 (Oxford: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1954), p. 236. 

18 . Quoted in Blake, Disraeli, p. 580. 

19 . Quoted in Taylor, Struggle for Mastery, p. 237. 

20 . Disraeli speech, June 24, 1872, in Joel H. Wiener, ed., Great Britain: Foreign Policy 
and the Span of Empire, 1689-1971 , vol. 3 (New York/London: Chelsea House in associa- 
tion with McGraw-Hill, 1972), p. 2500. 

21 . Lord Augustus Loftus, Diplomatic Reminiscences, 2nd ser. (London, 1892), vol. 2, p. 46. 

22 . Quoted in Firuz Kazemzadeh, “Russia and the Middle East,” in Ivo J. Lederer, ed., 
Russian Foreign Policy (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1962), p. 498. 

23. Ibid., p. 499. 

24. Ibid., p. 500. 

25 . Quoted in Alan Palmer, The Chancelleries of Europe (London: George, Allen and 
Unwin, 1983), p. 155. 

26. Ibid., p. 157. 

27 . Quoted in Blake, Disraeli, p. 646. 

28 . W. N. Medlicott, The Congress of Berlin and After (Hamden, Conn.: Archon Books, 
1963), p. 37. 

29 - Bismarck, in Kohl, ed., Politische Reden, vol. 7, p. 102. 

30. See Medlicott, The Congress of Berlin. 

31 . Quoted in Kennan, Decline of European Order, p. 70. 

32. Quoted in ibid., p. 141. 

33 . Speech by Gladstone, “Denouncing the Bulgarian Atrocities Committed by Turkey,” 
September 9, 1876, in Wiener, ed., Great Britain, vol. Ill, p. 2448. 

34. Quoted in A N. Wilson, Eminent Victorians (New York: W. W. Norton, 1989), p. 122. 

35 . Gladstone, quoted in Carsten Holbraad, The Concert of Europe: A Study in German 
and British International Theory, 1815-1914 (London: Longmans, 1970), p. 166. 

36. Ibid., p. 145. 

37 . Bismarck to Kaiser Wilhelm, October 22, 1883, in Otto von Bismarck, Die gesammelten 
Werke, vol. 6C (Berlin, 1935), pp. 282-83. 

38 . Gladstone to Lord Granville, August 22, 1873, in Agatha Ramm, ed., The Political 
Correspondence of Mr. Gladstone and Lord Granville, 1868-1876, vol. 2 (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1952), p. 401. 

40. Quoted in Kennan, Decline of European Order, p. 39. 

41 . Quoted in ibid., p. 258. 


843 



Notes 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

A Political Doomsday Machine: 

European Diplomacy Before the First World War 

1. Franz Schnabel, “Das Problem Bismarck,” in Hochland, vol. 42 (1949-50), pp. 1-27. 

2. Winston S. Churchill, Great Contemporaries (Chicago and London: University of Chi- 
cago Press, 1973), pp. 37ff. 

3. Frederick the Great, quoted in Memoirs of Prince von Billow. From Secretary of State 
to Imperial Chancellor (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1931), p. 52. 

4. Quoted in Maurice Bompard, Mon Ambassade en Russie, 1903-1908 (Paris, 1937), 
p. 40. 

5. B. H. Sumner, Russia and the Balkans 1870-1880 (Hamden, Conn.: Shoe String Press, 
1962), pp. 23ff. 

6. Serge Witte, quoted in Hugh Seton-Watson, The Russian Empire , 1801-1917 (Oxford: 
The Clarendon Press, 1967), pp. 581-82. 

7. Quoted in Lord Augustus Loftis, Diplomatic Reminiscences , 2nd. ser,, vol. 2 (London, 

1892), p. 38. 

8 . Quoted in Raymond Sontag, European Diplomatic History, 1871-1932 (New York. 
The Century Co., 1933), p. 59. 

9. Nikolai de Giers, quoted in Ludwig Reiners, In Europa gehen die Lichter aus . Der 
Untergang des Wilhelminischen Reiches (Munich, 1981), p. 30. 

10. Baron Staal, quoted in William L. Langer, The Diplomacy of Imperialism, 1st ed. (New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1935), p. 7. 

11. Quoted in George F. Kennan, The Fateful Alliance . France, Russia and the Coming of 
the First World War (New York: Pantheon, 1984), p. 147. 

12. Kaiser Wilhelm, quoted in Norman Rich, Friedrich von Holstein: Politics and Diplo- 
macy in the Era of Bismarck and Wilhelm II (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1965), p.465. 

13. Lord Salisbury, quoted in Gordon A. Craig, Germany . 1866-1945 (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1978), p. 236. 

14. Quoted in Fritz Stern, The Failure of Illiberalism (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1992), p. 93. 

15. Quoted in Malcolm Carroll, Germany and the Great Powers 1866-1914 (New York: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1938), p. 372. 

16. Chamberlain Speech, November 30, 1899, in Joel H. Wiener, ed., Great Britain: For- 
eign Policy and the Span of Empire, 1689-1971 , vol. 1 (New York/London: Chelsea House 
in association with McGraw-Hill, 1972), p. 510. 

17. Quoted in Sontag, European Diplomatic History, p. 60. 

18. Quoted in Valentin Chirol, Fifty Years in a Changing World. (London, 1927), p. 284. 
19- Memorandum by the Marquess of Salisbury, May 29, 1901, in G. P. Gooch and Harold 
Temperley, eds., British Documents on the Origins of the War, vol. II (London, 1927), p. 
68 . 

20. Quoted in Sontag, European Diplomatic History, p. 169. 

21. Ibid., p. 170. 

22. Kaiser Wilhelm, quoted in Reiners, In Europa, p. 106. 

23. Kaiser Wilhelm, quoted in Craig, Germany , p. 331. 

24. The Marquess of Lansdowne to Sir E. Monson, July 2, 1903, in Sontag, European 
Diplomatic History, p. 293. 

25. Sir Edward Grey to Sir F. Bertie, January 31, 1906, in Viscount Grey, Twenty-Five Years 
1892-1916 (New York: Frederick A. Stokes Co., 1925), p. 76. 

26. Sir Edward Grey to M. Cambon, French Ambassador in London, November 22, 1912, 
in ibid., pp. 94-95. 

27. Quoted in A. J. P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848-1918 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1954), p. 443. 

28. See, for example, Paul Schroeder, “World War I as Galloping Gertie: A Reply to 
Joachim Remak,” Journal of Modem History, vol. 44 (1972), p. 328. 


844 



Notes 


29 . Crowe Memorandum of January 1, 1907, in Kenneth Bourne and D. Cameron Watt, 
gen. eds., British Documents on Foreign Affairs (Frederick, Md.: University Publications of 
America, 1983), part 1, vol. 19, pp. 367ff. 

30 . Ibid., p. 384. 

31 . Ibid. 

32. Quoted in Sontag, European Diplomatic History, p. 140. 

33. Quoted in Carroll, Germany and the Great Powers, p. 657. 

34. Quoted in Klaus Wernecke, Der Wille zur Weltgeltung: Aussenpolitik und Offentlich- 
keit am Vorabend des Ersten Weltkrieges (Dusseldorf, 1970), p. 33. 

35 . Speech by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, David Lloyd George, July 12, 1911, in 
Wiener, Great Britain, vol. 1, p. 577. 

36 . Quoted in Carroll, Germany and the Great Powers, p. 643. 

37 . Quoted in D. C. B. Lieven, Russia and the Origins of the First World War (New York: 
St. Martin’s Press, 1983), p. 46. 

38 . Quoted in Taylor, Struggle for Mastery, p. 507. 

39 . Quoted in Lieven, Russia, p. 69- 

40 . Quoted in Taylor, Struggle for Mastery, p. 510. 

41 . Ibid., pp. 492-93. 

42 . Quoted in Lieven, Russia, p. 48. 

43. Quoted in Sontag, European Diplomatic History, p. 185. 

44. Quoted in Craig, Germany, p. 335. 

CHAPTER EIGHT 

Into the Vortex: The Military Doomsday Machine 

1. Obruchev memorandum to Giers, May 7/19, 1892, in George F. Kennan, The Fateful 
Alliance: France, Russia and the Coming of the First World War (New York: Pantheon, 
1984), Appendix II, p. 264. 

2 . Ibid., p. 265- 

3 . Ibid. 

4. Ibid., p. 268. 

5 . Quoted in ibid., p. 153. 

6. See Gerhart Ritter, The Schlieffen Plan (New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1958). 

7 . Quoted in Frank A. Golder, ed., Documents of Russian History 1914-1917, translated 
by Emanuel Aronsberg (New York: Century, 1927), pp. 9-10. 

8. Ibid., p. 13. 

9. Ibid., p. 18. 

10 . Ibid., p. 19. 

11 . Bethmann-Hollweg, quoted in Fritz Stern, The Failure of Illiberalism (New York: Co- 
lumbia University Press, 1992), p. 93. 

12 . Bethmann-Hollweg to Eisendecher, March 13, 1913, quoted in Konrad Jarausch, “The 
Illusion of Limited War: Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg’s Calculated Risk, July 1914,” in 
Central European History, March 1969, pp. 48-77. 

13 . Quoted in A. J. P. Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 1848—1918 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1954), pp. 521-22. 

14 . Serge Sazonov, The Fateful Years, 1909-1916: The Reminiscences of Serge Sazonov 
(New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1928), p. 31. 

15 . Ibid., p. 153. 

16 . N. V. Tcharykow, Glimpses of High Politics (London, 1931), p. 271. 

17 . Sazonov, Fateful Years, p. 40. 

18 . Statement by Sir Edward Grey in the House of Commons on Secret Military Negotia- 
tions with Other Powers, June 11, 1914, in Joel H. Wiener, ed., Great Britain: Foreign 
Policy and the Span of Empire, 1689-1971, vol. 1 (New York/London: Chelsea House in 
association with McGraw-Hill, 1972), p. 607. 

19 . Telegram from Sir Edward Grey to the British Ambassador at Berlin, Sir E. Goschen, 
Rejecting a Policy of Neutrality, July 30, 1914, in ibid. , p. 607. 


845 



Notes 


20. Quoted in D. C. B. Lieven, Russia and the Origins of the First World War (New York: 
St. Martin’s Press, 1983), p. 66. 

21. Quoted in ibid. , p. 143. 

22. Quoted in ibid. , p. 147. 

23. Sazonov, Fateful Years , p. 188. 

24. Quoted in L. C. F. Turner, “The Russian Mobilization in 1914,” in Journal of Contempo- 
rary History, vol. 3 (1968), p. 70. 


CHAPTER NINE 

The New Face of Diplomacy: Wilson and the Treaty of Versailles 

1. Quoted in A. J. P. Taylor, British History 1914-1945 (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 
1965), p. 114. 

2 . Quoted in A. J. P, Taylor, The Struggle for Mastery in Europe 1848-1918 (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1934), p. 535. 

3 . Quoted in ibid., p. 553. 

4 . Werner Maser, Hindenburg, Eine politische Biographie (Frankfurt/M-Berlin: Verlag 
Ullstein GmbH, 1992), p. 138. 

5 . Sir Edward Grey to Colonel E. M. House, September 22, 1915, quoted in Arthur S. 
Link, Woodrow Wilson, Revolution, War ; and Peace (Arlington Heights, Illinois: Harlan 
Davidson, 1979), p. 74. 

6. Woodrow Wilson, Remarks in Washington to the League to Enforce Peace, May 27, 1916, 
in Arthur S. Link, ed., The Papers of Woodrow Wilson (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 1966- ), vol. 37, p. 113. 

7 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address to the Senate, January 22, 1917, in ibid, vol. 40, p. 539. 

8 . Arthur S. Link, Wilson the Diplomatist (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1957), p. 100. 

9 . Ibid., pp. lOOff. 

10 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address to a Joint Session of Congress, January 8, 1918, in Link, 
ed., Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 45, p. 538. 

11 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address at Guildhall, December 28, 1918, in ibid., vol. 53, p. 532. 

12 . Wilson, Address to Senate, January 22, 1917, in ibid., vol. 40, p. 536. 

13 - Anthony Adamthwaite, France and the Coming of the Second World War, 1936-1939 
(London: Frank Cass, 1977), p. 4. 

14 . Andre Tardieu, The Truth About the Treaty (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1921), p. 165. 

15 . Wilson’s adviser David Hunter Miller, March 19, 1919, in David Hunter Miller, The 
Drafting of the Covenant (New York/London: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1928), vol. 1, p. 300. 

16 . Quoted in Tardieu, Truth About the Treaty, p. 173. 

17 . Tardieu, in ibid., pp. 174-75. 

18 . Bowman memorandum, December 10, 1918, in Charles Seymour, ed., The Intimate 
Papers of Colonel House (Boston/New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1926-28), vol. 4, pp. 280- 
281. 

19 . Quoted in Seth P. Tillmann, Anglo-American Relations at the Paris Peace Conference 
of 1919 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1961), p. 133. 

20 . Woodrow Wilson, An Address to the Third Plenary Session of the Peace Conference, 
February 14, 1919, in Link, ed., Papers of Woodrow Wilson, vol. 55, p. 175. 

21 . Bowman memorandum, in Seymour, ed., Intimate Papers, p. 281. 

22 . Quoted in Tillmann, Anglo-American Relations, p. 126. 

23 . Wilson’s adviser David Hunter Miller, in Miller, Drafting of the Covenant, vol. 1, 
p. 49. 

24 . Quoted in Paul Birdsall, Versailles Twenty Years After (New York: Reynal & Hitchcock, 
1941), p.128. 

25 . Quoted in Miller, Drafting of the Covenant, vol. 1, p. 216. 

26 . Ibid., vol. 2, p. 111. 

27. Quoted in Tardieu, Truth About the Treaty, p. 160. 

28 . Ibid., p. 202. 

29 . Ibid., p. 204. 


846 



Notes 


30 . House Diary, March 27, 1919, in Seymour, ed., Intimate Papers, vol. 4, p. 395. 

31 . Sir Charles Webster, The Congress of Vienna (London: Bell, 1937). 

32 . Lloyd George memorandum to Woodrow Wilson, March 25, 1919, in Ray Stannard 
Baker, Woodrow Wilson and World Settlement (New York: Doubleday, Page & Co., 1922), 
vol. Ill, p. 450. 

33 . Quoted in Louis L. Gerson, Woodrow Wilson and the Rebirth of Poland 1914-1920 
(New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1953), pp. 27-28. 

34 . Harold Nicolson, Peacemaking 1919 (London: Constable & Co., 1933), p. 187. 

CHAPTER TEN 

The Dilemmas of the Victors 

1. Woodrow Wilson, An Address in the Metropolitan Opera House, September 27, 1918, 

in Arthur S. Link, ed, Tf?e Papers of Woodrow Wilson (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 1966- ), vol. 51, pp. 131-32. 

2 . Quoted in Edward Hallett Carr, The Twenty Years' Crisis , 1919-1939 (2nd ed., 1946) 
(New York: Harper & Row, paper reprint, 1964), p. 34. 

3 . Quoted in ibid., p. 35. 

4 . Quoted in Anthony Adamthwaite, France and the Coming of the Second World War , 
1936-1939 (London: Frank Cass, 1977), p. 17. 

5 . Quoted in Stephen A. Schuker, The End of French Predominance in Europe (Chapel 
Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 1976), p. 254. 

6. Quoted in ibid, p. 251. 

7 . Ibid 

8. Ibid., p. 254. 

9 . Quoted in F. L. Carsten, Britain and the Weimar Republic (New York: Schocken Books, 
1984), p. 128. 

10 . Papers Respecting Negotiations for an Anglo-French Pact (London: His Majesty’s Statio- 
nery Office, 1924), paper no. 33, pp. 112-13. 

11 . Minutes of Cabinet Meetings; Conferences of Ministers, Cabinet Conclusions: 1(22), 10 
January 1922, Official Archives, Public Record Office, Cabinet Office, CAB 23/29. 

12 . Carr, Twenty Years' Crisis, pp. 200ff. 

13 . Quoted in Carsten, Britain and the Weimar Republic, p. 81. 

14 . Tardieu letter to House, March 22, 1919, in Andre Tardieu, The Truth About the Treaty 
(Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1921), p. 136. 

15. John Maynard Keynes, Treatise on the Economic Consequences of the Peace (London: 
Macmillan, 1919). 

16 . Edward Hallett Carr, The Bolshevik Rei>olution, 1917—1923, vol. 3 (New York/London: 
W. W. Norton, paper ed., 1985), p. 16. 

17 . Ibid, p. 9. 

18 . V. I. Lenin, Collected Works (Moscow: Progress Press, 1964), vol. 26, p. 448. 

19 . Quoted in Carr, Bolshevik Revolution, p. 44. 

20 . Quoted in ibid., p. 42. 

21 . Quoted in ibid., p. 70. 

22. Quoted in ibid., p. 1 61 . 

23 . Quoted in Edward Hallett Carr, German-Soviet Relations Between the Two World 
Wars, 1919-1939 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1951), p. 40. 

24 . Quoted in F. L. Carsten, The Reichswehr and Politics, 1918-1933 (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1966), p. 69. 

25 . Quoted in George F. Kennan, Russia and the West Under Lenin and Stalin (Boston/ 
Toronto: Little, Brown, I960), p. 206. 

26 . Quoted in ibid., p. 210. 

27 . Ibid., p. 212. 


847 



Notes 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

Stresemann and the Re-emergence of the Vanquished 

1. Quoted in Hermann Graml, Europa in der Zwischen der Kriegen (Munich, 1969), 
p. 154. 

2. Viscount d’Abernon, The Ambassador of Peace: Lord d'Abemon's Diary, vol. II (London: 
Hodder & Stoughton, 1929), p. 225. 

3 . Quoted in Graml, Europa, p. 130. 

4. Quoted in Stephen A. Schuker, The End of French Predominance in Europe (Chapel 
Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 1976), p. 255. 

5 . Quoted in Henry L. Bretton, Stresemann and the Revision of Versailles (Stanford, Calif.: 
Stanford University Press, 1953), p. 38. 

6. Quoted in Marc Trachtenberg, Reparations in World Politics (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1980), p. 48. 

7 . Quoted in ibid. 

8 . Quoted in Bretton, Stresemann, p. 21. 

9. Quoted in F. L. Carsten, Britain and the Weimar Republic (New York: Schocken Books, 
1984), p. 37. 

10 . Quoted in Hans W. Gatzke, Stresemann and the Rearmament of Germany (Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1954), p. 12. 

11 . Gustav Stresemann, His Diaries, Letters and Papers, edited and translated by Eric 
Sutton (London, 1935), vol. 1, p. 225. 

12 . Quoted in David Dutton, Austen Chamberlain, Gentleman in Politics (Bolton: Ross 
Anderson, 1985), p. 250. 

13 . Quoted in ibid., p. 5. 

14 . Quoted in Jon Jacobson, Locarno Diplomacy (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press, 1972), p. 90. 

15 . Quoted in Raymond J. Sontag, A Broken World, 1919-1939 (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1971), p. 133. 

16 . Selig Adler, The Isolationist Impulse: Its Twentieth-Century Reaction (New York: Free 
Press, 1957), p. 217. 

17 . D. W. Brogan, The French Nation, 1814-1940 (London: Hamilton, 1957), p. 267. 

18 . Quoted in Dutton, Austen Chamberlain, p. 25 T 

19 . F. L. Carsten, The Reichswehr and Politics, 1918-1933 (Berkeley: University of Califor- 
nia Press, 1973), p. 139. 

20 . Quoted in Bretton, Stresemann, p. 22. 

21 . Quoted in Anthony Adamthwaite, France and the Coming of the Second World War, 
1936-1939 (London: Frank Cass, 1977), p. 29- 

22. Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. 1, The Gathering Storm (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1948), p. 74. 

23 . Quoted in ibid., p. 73. 

24 . Quoted in A. J. P. Taylor, The Origins of the Second World War (New York: Atheneum, 
paper ed., 1983), p. 66. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 

The End of Illusion: Hitler and the Destruction of Versailles 

1. Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (New York: Alfred A Knopf, 1992), 
p. 380. 

2. Henry Picker, Hitlers Tischgesprache in Fuhrerhauptequartier 1941-1942, ed., Percy 
Ernst Schramm (Stuttgart, 1963). 

3 . Phipps to Simon, November 21, 1933, quoted in A. J. P. Taylor, The Origins of the Second 
World War (New York: Atheneum, 1983), pp. 73-74. 

4 . MacDonald conversation wtih Daladier, March 16, 1933, in ibid., p. 74. 

5 . Ibid., p. 75. 

6. Anglo-French meeting, September 22, 1933, in ibid, pp. 75-7 6. 


848 



Notes 


7. Quoted in Martin Gilbert, Churchill: A Life (New York: Henry Holt, 1991), p. 523- 

8 . Quoted in ibid., p. 524. 

9. Quoted in ibid., p. 523. 

10 . Quoted in Robert J. Young, In Command of France . French Foreign Policy 
and Military Planning 1933-1940 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1978), 
p. 37. 

11 . Quoted in Anthony Adamthwaite, France and the Coming of the Second World War, 
1936-1939 (London: Frank Cass, 1977), p. 30. 

12 . Quoted in Paul Johnson, Modem Times . The World from the Twenties to the Eighties 
(New York: Harper & Row, 1983), p. 341. 

13 . Quoted in Gilbert, Churchill, p. 531. 

14 . Quoted in ibid., pp. 531-32. 

15 . Quoted in ibid., p. 537. 

16 . Quoted in Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. 1, The Gathering Storm 
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1948), p. 119. 

17 . Quoted in Gilbert, Churchill, p. 538. 

18 . Quoted in Adamthwaite, France, 1936-1939, p. 75. 

19 . Haile Selassie, June 30, 1936, quoted in David Clay Large, Between Two Fires: Europe's 
Path in the 1930s (New York/London: W. W. Norton, 1990), pp. 177-78. 

20 . Quoted in Josef Henke, England in Hitlers Politischem Kalkul (German Bundesarchiv, 
Schriften, no. 20, 1973), p. 4l. 

21. Gerhard Weinberg, The Foreign Policy of Hitler's Germany: Diplomatic Revolution in 
Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970), p. 241. 

22 . Anthony Eden, Earl of Avon, The Eden Memoirs, vol. 1, Facing the Dictators (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1962), pp. 375-7 6. 

23. Quoted in Weinberg, Foreign Policy of Hitler’s Germany, p. 259. 

24 . Quoted in ibid., p. 254. 

25. Churchill, Gathering Storm, p. 196. 

26. Quoted in Gilbert, Churchill, p. 553. 

27 . Parliamentary Debates, 5th ser., vol. 309 (London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 
1936), March 10, 1936, col. 1976. 

28 . Quoted in Adamthwaite, France, 1936-1939, p. 41. 

29 . Ibid., pp. 53ff. 

30 . Ibid. 

31 . Memorandum, Foreign Ministry Circular, quoted in Taylor, Origins of Second World 
War, p. 137. 

32. Quoted in Adamthwaite, France, 1936-1939, p. 68. 

33 . Quoted in ibid., p. 69. 

34 . Quoted in Gordon A. Craig, Germany 1866-1945 (New York/Oxford: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1978), p. 698. 

35 . Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf (New York: Reynal & Hitchcock, 1940), p. 175. 

36 . Halifax to Phipps, March 22, 1938, quoted in Taylor, Origins of Second World War, 
p. 155. 

37. Ibid., p. 191. 

38 . Ibid. 

39. Bullock, Hitler and Stalin, pp. 582ff. 

40 . Quoted in ibid., p. 589. 

41. Quoted in Taylor, Origins of Second World War, p. 191. 

42 . Prime Minister W. L. Mackenzie King, September 29, 1938, in John A. Munro, ed., 
Documents on Canadian External Relations , vol. 6 (Ottawa: Department of External 
Affairs, 1972), p. 1099. 

43 . Prime Minister J. A. Lyons, September 30, 1938, in R. G. Neale, ed., Documents on 
Australian Foreign Policy 1937-49, vol. I (Canberra: Australian Government Publishing 
Service), p. 476. 

44 . Chamberlain to the House of Commons, October 3, 1938, Parliamentary Debates, 5th 
ser., vol. 339 (1938), col. 48. 


849 



Notes 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 

Stalin’s Bazaar 

1. Quoted in T. A. Taracouzio, War and Peace in Soviet Diplomacy (New York: Macmillan, 
1940), pp. 139-40. 

2. Stalin speech to 15th Party Congress, December 3, 1927, quoted in Nathan Leites, A 
Study of Bolshevism (Glencoe, III: Free Press of Glencoe, 1953), p. 501. 

3 . Stalin report to 17th Party Congress, January 26, 1934, in Alvin Z. Rubinstein, ed., The 
Foreign Policy of the Soviet Union (New York: Random House, I960), p. 108. 

4 . Report to the 7th Congress of the Communist International, August 1935, in ibid., 
pp. 133-36. 

5 . Robert Legvold, After the Soviet Union: From Empire to Nations (New York: W. W. 
Norton, 1992), p. 7. 

6. Quoted in Anthony Adamthwaite, France and the Coming of the Second World War ; 
1936-1939 (London: Frank Cass, 1977), p. 264. 

7. Quoted in Anthony Read and David Fisher, The Deadly Embrace: Hitler ; Stalin, and the 
Nazi-Soviet Pact 1939-1941 (New York/London: W. W. Norton, 1988), p. 57. 

8. Donald Cameron Watt, How War Came: The Immediate Origins of the Second World 
War, 1938-1939 (London-. William Heinemann, 1989), p. 109. 

9. Quoted in Read and Fisher, Deadly Embrace, p. 59. 

10 . Ibid. 

11 . Quoted in Keith Feiling, The Life of Neville Chamberlain (London: Macmillan, 1946), 
p. 403. 

12 . Quoted in Watt, How War Came, pp. 221-22. 

13 . Quoted in Read and Fisher, Deadly Embrace, p. 69. 

14 . Quoted in ibid., p. 72. 

15 . Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), 
p. 614. 

l6 Quoted in Gordon A. Craig, Germany 1866-1945 (New York/Oxford: Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1978), pp. 711-12. 

17 . Quoted in Bullock, Hitler and Stalin, p. 61 6. 

18 . Quoted in ibid., p. 617. 

19 . Quoted in ibid., p. 620. 

20. A. J. P. Taylor, The Origins of the Second World War (New York: Arheneum, 1961), 
p. 231. 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 

The Nazi-Soviet Pact 

1. Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), 
pp. 679-80. 

2 . Quoted in ibid., p. 682. 

3 . Anthony Read and David Fisher, The Deadly Embrace: Hitler, Stalin, and the Nazi-Soviet 
Pact 1939-1941 (New York/London: W. W. Norton, 1988), p. 508; and Bullock, Hitler and 
Stalin, p. 687. 

4. Read and Fisher, Deadly Embrace, p. 509. 

5 . Quoted in Martin Wight, Power Politics (New York: Holmes and Meier, 1978), p. 176. 

6. Documents on German Foreign Policy, 1918-1945 , series D (1937-1945), vol. XI, 
“The War Years” (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, I960), p. 537. 

7 . Ibid. 

8. Ibid., pp. 537-38. 

9 . Ibid., p. 539. 

10 . Read and Fisher, Deadly Embrace, p. 519. 

11 . Bullock, Hitler and Stalin, p. 688. 

12 . Quoted in ibid., p. 689. 

13 . Quoted in Read and Fisher, Deadly Embrace, p. 530. 


850 



Notes 


14 . Ibid., p. 532. 

15. In our times, it was argued — wrongly, in my view — that this was not really a Soviet 
“proposal.” See the argument put forth (versus the argument of Zbigniew Brzezinski) in 
Raymond L. Garthoff, Detente and Confrontation: American-Soviet Relations from Nixon 
to Reagan (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1985), pp. 941-42. 

16. Bullock, Hitler and Stalin, p. 688. 

17 . Quoted in Read and Fisher, Deadly Embrace, p. 568. See also Bullock, Hitler and 
Stalin, p. 716. 

18 . Quoted in Read and Fisher, Deadly Embrace, p. 576. 

19 . Quoted in ibid. 

20 . Quoted in ibid., p. 640. 

21 . Quoted in ibid., pp. 647-48. 

22 . Quoted in ibid., p. 629. 


CHAPTER FIFTEEN 

America Re-enters the Arena: Franklin Delano Roosevelt 

1. Isaiah Berlin, Personal Impressions, edited by Henry Hardy (New York: Viking Press, 

1981), p. 26. 

2 . See ibid., pp. 23-31. 

3 . Ibid. 

4 . U.S. Senate, Conference on the Limitation of Armament, Senate Documents, vol. 10, 
67th Cong., 2nd sess., 1921-1922 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 

1922), p. 11. 

5 . Selig Adler, The Isolationist Impulse, Its Twentieth-Century Reaction (New York: Free 
Press; London: Collier-Macmillan, 1937), p. 142. 

6 . U.S. Senate, Conference on Limitation of Armament, pp. 867-68. 

7 . Quoted in Adler y Isolationist Impulse, p. 214. 

8 . Quoted in ibid., p. 21 6. 

9. Ibid., p. 214. 

10 . Frank B. Kellogg, “The Settlement of International Controversies by Pacific Means,” 
address delivered before the World Alliance for International Friendship, November 11, 
1928 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1928). 

11 . Ibid. 

12 . Henry L. Stimson and McGeorge Bundy, On Active Service in Peace and War (New 
York: Harper & Brothers, 1948), p. 259- 

13 . Roosevelt Address before the Woodrow Wilson Foundation, December 28, 1933, in 
The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt (New York: Random House, 
1938), vol. 2, 1933, pp. 548-49. 

14 . Adler, Isolationist Impulse, pp. 235-36. 

15. Ruhl J. Bartlett, ed., The Record of American Diplomacy (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1956), pp. 572-77. The First Neutrality Act, signed by FDR on August 31, 1935: arms 
embargo; Americans not permitted to travel on ships of belligerents. The Second Neutrality 
Act, signed by FDR on February 29, 1936 (a week before the reoccupation of the Rhineland 
on March 7): extended the First Act through May 1, 1936, and added a prohibition against 
loans or credits to belligerents. The Third Neutrality Act, signed by FDR on May 1, 1937: 
extended previous acts due to expire at midnight plus “cash and carry” provisions for 
certain nonmilitary goods. 

16 . Treaty between the United States of America and Germany, to restore friendly relations 
and terminate the state of war between them, signed in Berlin August 25, 1921. 

17 . Hull memo to FDR, March 9, 1936, quoted in William Appleman Williams, ed., The 
Shaping of American Diplomacy, vol. II, 1914-1968, 2nd ed. (Chicago: Rand McNally, 
1973), p. 199. 

18 . Address in Chicago, October 5, 1937, in Roosevelt, Public Papers (New York: Macmil- 
lan Co., 1941), 1937 vol., p. 410. 

19 . Ibid., 1939 vol., Introduction by FDR, p. xxviii. 


851 



Notes 


20. Charles A. Beard, American Foreign Policy in the Making, 1932-1940: A Study in 
Responsibilities (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1946), pp. 188ff. 

21. Quoted in ibid., p. 190. 

22. Ibid. Italics added. 

23. Ibid., p. 193. 

24. Ibid. 

25. Quoted in Adler, Isolationist Impulse, pp. 244-45. 

26. Quoted in Anthony Adamthwaite, France and the Coming of the Second World War, 
1936-1939 (London: Frank Cass, 1977), p. 209. 

27. Roosevelt Press Conference, September 9, 1938, in Complete Presidential Press Confer- 
ences of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, vol. 12, 1938 (New York: Da Capo Press, 1972), by 
date. 

28. Radio address to the Herald-Tribune Forum, October 26, 1938, in Roosevelt, Public 
Papers, 1938 vol., p. 564. 

29. Ibid., p. 565. 

30. Donald Cameron Watt, How War Came . The Immediate Origins of the Second World 
War, 1938-1939 (London: William Heinemann, 1989), p. 130. 

31. Annual Message to the Congress, January 4, 1939, in Roosevelt, Public Papers, 1939 
vol., p. 3. 

32. Franklin D. Roosevelt, Complete Presidential Press Conferences of Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt, vol. 13, 1939, p. 262. 

33. Roosevelt, Public Papers, 1939 vol., pp. 198-99- 

34. Watt, How War Came, p. 261. 

35. “The President Again Seeks a Way to Peace. A Message to Chancellor Adolf Hitler and 
Premier Benito Mussolini, April 14, 1939,” in Roosevelt, Public Papers, 1939, pp. 201-5. 

36. Vandenberg speech in the Senate, “It Is Not Cowardice to Think of America First,” 
February 27, 1939, in Vital Speeches of the Day, vol. v, no. 12 (April 1, 1939), pp. 356-57. 

37. Quoted in Adler, Isolationist Impulse, p. 248. 

38. Ted Morgan, FDR: A Biography (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1985), p. 520. 

39. Address at the University of Virginia, June 10, 1940, in Roosevelt, Public Papers, 1940 
vol., pp. 263-64. 

40. Churchill speech to the House of Commons, June 4, 1940, in Martin Gilbert, Churchill: 
A Life (New York: Henry Holt, 1991), p. 656. 

41. Roosevelt’s State of the Union address of January 6, 1941, Vital Speeches, vol. vii, no. 7 
(January 15, 1941), p. 198. 

42. Quoted in Adler, Isolationist Impulse, p. 282. 

43. Ibid. 

44. Quoted in ibid., p. 284. 

45. Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. 3, The Grand Alliance (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1950), p. 140. 

46. Radio Address Announcing the Proclamation of an Unlimited National Emergency, 
May 27, 1941, in Roosevelt, Public Papers (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1950), 1941 vol., 
p. 192. 

47. The Atlantic Charter: Official Statement on Meeting Between the President and Prime 
Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, in ibid., p. 314. 

48. Ibid., p. 315. 

49. Fireside Chat to the Nation, September 11, 1941, in ibid., pp. 384-92. 

50. Adler, Isolationist Impulse, p. 257. 

CHAPTER SIXTEEN 

Three Approaches to Peace: Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill 
in World War II 

1. Churchill & Roosevelt, The Complete Correspondence, 3 vols., edited by Warren F. 
Kimball, vol. II, Alliance Forged, November 1942 -February 1944 (Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 1984), p. 767 . 


852 



Notes 


2 . Quoted in Herbert Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin: The War They Waged and the Peace 
They Sought (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1957), p. 340. 

3 . James MacGregor Burns, Roosevelt: The Soldier of Freedom (New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1970), p. 566. 

4 . Message to Churchill, June 1, 1942, in Kimball, ed. Churchill & Roosevelt, vol. I, Alliance 
Emerging, October 1933-November 1942, p. 502. 

5 . Quoted in Elliott Roosevelt, As He Saw It (New York: Duell, Sloan and Pearce, 1946), 
pp. 115-16. 

6 . Quoted in Robert Dallek, Franklin D. Roosevelt and American Foreign Policy, 1932- 
1945 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1979), p. 324. 

7 . Cordell Hull, address before Congress regarding the Moscow Conference, November 
18, 1943, in U.S. Department of State Bulletin, vol. ix, no. 230 (November 20, 1943), p. 343. 

8 . Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. 4, The Hinge of Fate (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1950), p. 214. 

9 . Quoted in William Roger Louis, Imperialism at Bay: The United States and the Decoloni- 
zation of the British Empire, 1941-1945 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), 

p. 121 . 

10 . Quoted in ibid., p. 129. 

11 . Quoted in ibid., pp. 154-55. 

12 . I am indebted for much of this analysis to Peter Rodman’s forthcoming book on the 
U.S. and Soviet approaches to the Third World, to be published by Charles Scribner’s Sons. 

13 . Memorandum by Charles Taussig, March 15, 1944, quoted in Louis, Imperialism at 
Bay, p. 486. 

14 . Quoted in Robert E. Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins: An Intimate History (New 
York: Harper & Brothers, 1948), p. 605. 

15 . Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, pp. 11-13. 

16 . See Eric Larrabee, Commander in Chief Franklin Delano Roosevelt, His Lieutenants, 
and Their War (New York: Harper & Row, 1987), p. 503. 

17 . Burns, Roosevelt, p. 374. 

18 . I am indebted to an unpublished speech by Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., “Franklin D. 
Roosevelt and U.S. Foreign Policy,” delivered before the Society for Historians of American 
Foreign Relations, Vassar College, June 18, 1992. 

19 . Sir John Wheeler-Bennett and Anthony Nicholls, The Semblance of Peace (London: 
Macmillan, 1972), pp. 46fF. 

20 . Quoted in The Memoirs of Cordell Hull, vol. II (New York: Macmillan, 1948), p. 1452. 

21 . Wheeler-Bennett and Nicholls, Semblance of Peace, p. 49. 

22. Hull, Memoirs, vol. II, pp. 1168-70. 

23 . Quoted in Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, p. 59. 

24 . Quoted in William G. Hyland, The Cold War Is Over (New York: Random House, 
1990), p. 32. 

25 . Quoted in Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins, pp. 572-73. 

26 . Quoted in ibid., p. 572. 

27. Schlesinger speech, “Roosevelt and U.S. Foreign Policy,” p. 18. 

28. Ibid., p. 17. 

29 . John Colville, The Fringes of Power: 10 Downing Street Diaries, 1939-1955 (New 
York/London: W. W. Norton, 1985), p. 404. 

30 . Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, pp. 131-32. 

31 . Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (New York: Alfred A Knopf, 1992), 
p. 821. 

32 . Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, p. 285. (Emphasis added.) 

33. Quoted in Frances Perkins, The Roosevelt I Knew (New York: Viking, 1946), pp. 84- 
85. 

34. Quoted in Bertram D. Hulen, “Washington Hails Reds’ Step as Great Gain for the 
Allies,” New York Times, May 23, 1943, p. 30. 

35 . “The United States in a New World,” Fortune, suppl., April 1943. 

36 . Roosevelt’s Christmas Eve Fireside Chat on Teheran and Cairo Conferences, Decem- 


853 



Notes 


ber 23, 1943, in The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt, 1943 vol. (New 
York: Harper & Brothers), p. 558. 

37. Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. 6, Triumph and Tragedy (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1953), p. 198. See also Kimball, ed., Churchill & Roosevelt , vol. Ill, 
Alliance Declining, February 1944- April 1945, p. 351; and Hyland, Cold War, pp. 35-36. 

38. Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, pp. 522-23. 

39. Quoted in Dallek, Franklin D. Roosevelt, p. 520. 

40 . Quoted in Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins, p. 870. 

41 . Franklin Roosevelt’s Inaugural Address, January 20, 1945, in The Presidents Speak, 
annotated by Davis Newton Lott (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969), p. 248. 

42. Quoted in Dallek, Franklin D. Roosevelt, p. 521. 

43 . Quoted in Milovan Djilas, Conversations with Stalin (New York: Harcourt, Brace & 
World, 1962), p. 114. 

44. Quoted in Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, pp. 607-8. 

45 . Bullock, Hitler and Stalin, pp. 883-84. 

46. Churchill, Triumph and Tragedy (paper edition with introduction by John Keegan, 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986), p. 436. 

47 . Dmitri Volkogonov, Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy, edited and translated from Russian 
by Harold Shukman (Rocklin, Calif.: Prima Publishing, 1991-92; original ed. New York: 
Grove Weidenfeld, 1991), pp. 412ff. 

48 . See Bullock, Hitler and Stalin, pp. 697ff. 

49 - Quoted in Joachim C. Fest, Hitler, translated from German by Richard and Clara 
Winston (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974), p. 694. 

50 . Churchill, Triumph and Tragedy, p. 308. 

51 . Quoted in Dallek , Franklin D. Roosevelt, p. 505. 

52 . Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin, p. 270. 

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 

The Beginning of the Cold War 

1. James MacGregor Burns, Roosevelt: The Soldier of Freedom (New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1970), pp. 448-49. 

2 . Quoted in Selig Adler, The Isolationist Impulse: Its Twentieth-Century Reaction (New 
York: Free Press; London: Collier-Macmillan, 1957), p. 285. 

3 . Truman, paraphrased at late May 1945 meeting with leaders of National Citizens Political 
Action Committee, quoted in Richard J. Walton, Henry > Wallace, Harry Truman, and the 
Cold War (New York: Viking Press, 1976), p. 119. 

4 . Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress, April 16, 1945, Public Papers of the 
Presidents of the United States, Harry S. Truman, 1945 vol. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 1961), p. 5 (hereinafter cited as Truman Papers ); repeated p. 22, in 
Truman Address of April 25, 1945. 

5 . Quoted in W. Averell Harriman and Elie Abel, Special Envoy to Churchill and Stalin, 
1941-1946 (New York: Random House, 1975), p. 474. 

6. Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. 6, Triumph and Tragedy (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1953), p. 503. 

7. Harry S Truman, Year of Decisions, Memoirs, vol. one (New York: Doubleday, 1955), p. 
260 . 

8. Herbert Feis, Churchill, Roosevelt, Stalin: The War They Waged and the Peace They 
Sought (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1957), p. 133. 

9. Quoted in ibid., p. 652. 

10 . Fleet Admiral William D. Leahy, / Was There: The Personal History of the Chief of Staff 
to Presidents Roosevelt and Truman Based on His Notes and Diaries Made at the Time 
(New York/London/Toronto: Whittlesey House/McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1950), pp. 
379-80. 

11 . Ibid. , p. 380. 

12 . Quoted in Robert E. Sherwood, Roosevelt and Hopkins: An Intimate History (New 
York: Harper & Brothers, 1948), p. 890. 


854 



Notes 


13 . Ibid., p. 908. 

14 . State Department briefing book paper, “British Plans for a Western European Bloc,” 
July 4, 1945, in U.S. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States: The 
Conference of Berlin (The Potsdam Conference) 1945 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office), vol. I, pp. 262-63. 

15 . Quoted in Terry H. Anderson, The United States, Great Britain, and the Cold War, 

1944- 1947 (Columbia, Mo.: University of Missouri Press, 1981), p. 69- 

16. Quoted in Robert J. Donovan, Conflict and Crisis-. The Presidency of Harry S Truman 

1945- 1948 (New York: W. W. Norton, 1977), p. 81. 

17 . Quoted in ibid., p. 84. 

18 . Truman, Year of Decisions, p. 41 6. 

19 . Churchill, Triumph and Tragedy, p. 582. 

20 . Quoted in John Lewis Gaddis, The United States and the Origins of the Cold War (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1972), p. 266. 

21 . Truman Address on Foreign Policy at the Navy Day Celebration, New York City, Octo- 
ber 27, 1945, in Truman Papers, 1945 vol., pp. 431-38. 

22 . Quoted in Gaddis, Origins of Cold War, p. 280. 

23 . Milovan Djilas, Conversations with Stalin (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1962), 
p. 114. 

24 . Robert Conquest, “The Evil of This Time,” New York Review of Books, vol. XL, no. 15 
(September 23, 1993), p. 27. 

25 . Quoted in Henry A. Kissinger, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy (New York: 
Harper & Brothers, published for the Council on Foreign Relations, 1957), p. 367. 

26. Ibid., p. 371. 

27. Quoted in Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1992), p. 907. 

28 . Joseph Stalin’s Election Address, “New Five-Year Plan for Russia,” delivered over Radio 
Moscow on February 9, 1946, reprinted in The New York Times, February 10, 1946. 

29 . Ibid. 

30 . Ibid. 

31 . See P. M. S. Blackett, Atomic Weapons and East-West Relations (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1956). 

32 . Winston S. Churchill speech, “The Sinews of Peace,” March 5, 1946, at Westminster 
College, Fulton, Mo., in Robert Rhodes James, ed., Winston S. Churchill: His Complete 
Speeches, 1897-1963 (New York/London: Chelsea House in association with R. R Bowker, 
1974), vol. VII, 1943-1949, pp. 7285ff. 

33. Ibid., p. 7292. 

34 . George F. Kennan, “Long Telegram” from Moscow, February 22, 1946, in Foreign 
Relations of the United States, 1946 (Washington, D C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
1969), vol. VI, p. 697. 

35 . Andrei Zhdanov, “The International Situation,” delivered at the Founding Conference 
of the Cominform, September 1947, in U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on 
Foreign Affairs, The Strategy and Tactics of World Communism, suppl. I, “One Hundred 
Years of Communism, 1848-1948,” 80th Cong., 2nd sess., doc. no. 619 (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1948), pp. 21 Iff. 

36. Bullock, Hitler and Stalin, p. 922. 

37 . Ibid., p. 923. 

38 . Radio Address, April 28, 1947, U.S. Department of State Bulletin, vol. XVI, no. 410, 
p. 924. 


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 

The Success and the Pain of Containment 

1. George F. Kennan, “Long Telegram” from Moscow, February 22, 1946, in Foreign 
Relations of the United States, 1946 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
1969), vol. VI, pp. 666-709. 

2 . Ibid., p. 700. 


855 



Notes 


3. Ibid., p. 699. 

4. H. Freeman Matthews, Memorandum by the Acting Department of State Member (Mat- 
thews) to the State-War-Navy Coordinating Committee, “Political Estimate of Soviet Policy 
for Use in Connection with Military Studies,” April 1, 1946, in Foreign Relations, United 
States, 1946, vol. I, p. 1169. 

5. Ibid. 

6. Ibid. , p. 1170. 

7 . Ibid., p. 1168. 

8 . Ibid, p. 1170. 

9. Clark Clifford, “American Relations with the Soviet Union: A Report to the President by 
the Special Counsel to the President,” September 24, 1946, in Thomas H. Etzold and John 
Lewis Gaddis, eds., Containment: Documents on American Policy and Strategy, 1945 - 
1950 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1978), p. 66. 

10. Ibid., p. 67. (Emphases added.) 

11 . Ibid., p. 68. 

12 . Ibid., p. 71. 

13* Quoted in Joseph M. Jones, The Fifteen Weeks (February 21 -June 5 , 1947) (New York: 
Viking Press, 1955), p. 141. 

14. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Harry S Truman, 1947 vol. (Wash- 
ington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963), p. 178. 

15. Ibid., p. 179. 

16. Ibid., p. 178. 

17. George Marshall, “European Initiative Essential to Economic Recovery,” Address at 
Commencement Exercises at Harvard University, June 5, 1947, in U.S. Department of State 
Bulletin, vol. XVI, no. 415 (June 5, 1947), p. 1160. (Emphasis added.) 

18. Ibid. 

19. Ibid. 

20. “X” (George F. Kennan), “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 25, no. 
4 (July 1947), p. 575. 

21. Ibid., p. 581. 

22. Ibid., pp. 579-80. 

23. Ibid., p. 582. 

24. Testimony of Ambassador Warren Austin, April 28, 1949, in U.S. Senate, Committee on 
Foreign Relations, The North Atlantic Treaty, Hearings, 81st Cong., 1st sess. (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1949), pt. I, p. 97. 

25. Ibid., pt. I, appendix, pp. 334-37. 

26. Ibid., p. 337. 

27. Ibid. , pt. I,p. 17. 

28. Ibid., p. 150. 

29. U.S. Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Report on the North Atlantic Treaty, 81st 
Cong., 1st sess., June 6, 1949 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1949), 
p. 23. 

30. See, e.g., Acheson’s testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services 
Committees, August 8, 1949, in State Bulletin, vol. XXI, no. 529 (August 22, 1949), pp. 265ff, 
and his address to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, April 30, 1951, in State Bulletin, vol. 
XXIV, no. 619 (May 14, 1951), pp. 766-70. 

31. Acheson address, “Achieving a Community Sense Among Free Nations — A Step To- 
ward World Order,” before the Harvard Alumni Association, Cambridge, Mass., June 22, 
1950, in State Bulletin, vol. XXIII, no. 574 (July 3, 1950), p. 17. 

32. Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War, vol. 6, Triumph and Tragedy (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1953; paperback ed., with introduction by John Keegan, 1985), p. 266. 

33. NSC-68, “United States Objectives and Programs for National Security,” April 14, 1950, 
in Foreign Relations, United States, 1950, vol. I, p. 240. 

34. Ibid., p. 241. 

35. Ibid. 

36. Ibid, pp. 241-42. 

37. Ibid., p. 279. 


856 



Notes 


38. Walter Lippmann, The Cold War. A Study in US . Foreign Policy (New York/London: 
Harper & Brothers, 1947), p. 13. 

39. Ibid. , p. 23. 

40. Ibid., pp. 61-62. 

41. Winston S. Churchill, His Complete Speeches, 1897-1963 , ed. by Robert Rhodes James, 
vol. VII, 1943-1949 (New York/London: Chelsea House in association with R. R Bowker, 
1974), p. 7710. 

42. Ibid., vol. VIII (1950-1963), p. 8132. 

43. Henry A Wallace, Toward World Peace (New York: Reynal & Hitchcock, 1948), p. 118. 

44. Henry A Wallace, Address at Madison Square Garden, September 12, 1946, in Walter 
LaFeber, ed., The Dynamics of World Power: A Documentary > History of United States 
Foreign Policy, 1945—1973 > vol. II, Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union (New York: 
Chelsea House Publishers, 1973), p. 260. 

45. Quoted in J. Samuel Walker, Henry A Wallace and American Foreign Policy (West- 
port, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1976), p. 129. 

46. Quoted in ibid., p. 121. 

47. Wallace, memorandum for Truman, March 14, 1946, in Harry S Truman, Year of 
Decisions, Memoirs, vol. one (New York: Doubleday, 1955), p. 555. 

48. Wallace Address at Madison Square Garden, September 12, 1946, in LaFeber, ed., 
Dynamics of World Power, pp. 258-59. 

49. Wallace speech announcing his candidacy for President, December 29, 1947, in 
Thomas G. Paterson, ed., Cold War Critics: Alternatives to American Foreign Policy in the 
Truman Years (Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1971), pp. 98-103. 

50. Wallace, quoted in Alonzo Hanby, ‘‘Henry A. Wallace, the Liberals, and Soviet-American 
Relations,” Review of Politics, vol. XXX (April 1968), p. 164. 

51. George F. Kennan, Russia, the Atom and the West (New York: Harper & Brothers, 
1957), p. 13. 


CHAPTER NINETEEN 

The Dilemma of Containment: The Korean War 

1. U.S. House of Representatives, Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, 
Military Functions: National Military Establishment Appropriation Bill for 1949 , Hearings, 
80th Cong., 2nd sess. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1948), pt. 3, p. 
3. 

2. General MacArthur, interview with G. Ward Price, New York Times, March 2, 1949, p. 
22 . 

3. Secretary of State Dean Acheson, “Crisis in Asia: An Examination of U.S. Policy,” remarks 
before the National Press Club, Washington, January 12, 1950, in US. Department of State 
Bulletin, vol. XXII, no. 551 (January 23, 1950), p. 116. 

4. Nikita S. Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, with an Introduction, Commentary, and 
Notes by Edward Crankshaw, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott (Boston: Little, Brown, 
1970), pp. 368-69. Recently disclosed Soviet material suggests that the Soviet role was 
much more significant. See Kathryn Weathersby, “New Findings on the Korean War,” Cold 
War International History Project Bulletin, Fall 1993, Woodrow Wilson Center, Washing- 
ton, D.C. 

5. Statement by President Truman issued June 27, 1950, in Harry S Truman, Years of Trial 
and Hope 1946 - 1952 , Memoirs, vol. two (New York: Doubleday, 1956), pp. 338-39. 

6. Ibid, p. 339. 

7. Ibid. 

8. Ibid. 

9. Quoted in Max Hastings, The Korean War (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1987), p. 133. 

10. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Harry S. Truman, 1950 vol. (Wash- 
ington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965), pp. 674-75 (hereinafter cited as 
Truman Papers). 

11. Truman statement of November 30, 1950, in ibid., p. 724. 


857 



Notes 


12 . Truman Papers, 1951 vol., p. 227. 

13 . U.S. Senate, Committee on Armed Services and Committee on Foreign Relations, 
Military Situation in the Far East, Hearings, 82nd Cong., 1st sess. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1951), pt. 1, p. 75 (hereinafter cited as MacArthur Hearings). 

14 . Ibid., p. 30. 

15 . Ibid. 

16. Truman Papers, 1951 vol., pp. 226-27. 

17 . Ibid., p. 227. 

18 . MacArthur Hearings, pt. 1, p. 45. 

19 . Ibid., pt. 2, p. 938. 

20 . Ibid., pt. 3, p. 1717. 

21 . Ibid., pp. 1718-19. 

22 . Truman, Trial and Hope, p. 345. 

23. MacArthur Hearings, pt. 1, p. 593. 

24 . Ibid., pt. 2, p. 896. 

25 . Ibid., p. 732. 

26 . Ibid., pt. 3, p. 1720. 

27 . General Matthew B. Ridgway, U.S.A., Ret., Soldier: The Memoirs of Matthew B. Ridgway 
(Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1974 reprint), pp. 219-20. 

28 . MacArthur Hearings, pt. 1, p. 68. 

29* Hastings, Korean War, pp. 186fF. 

30. Quoted in ibid., p. 197. 

31 . MacArthur Hearings, pt. 3, p. 1717. 


CHAPTER TWENTY 

Negotiating with the Communists: 

Adenauer, Churchill, and Eisenhower 

1. Yevgenii S. Varga, Changes in the Economy of Capitalism as a Result of the Second 
World War (Moscow: Politicheskaya Literatura, 1946), quoted in Allen Lynch, The Soviet 
Study of International Relations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967), pp. 20- 
28. 

2. William G. Hyland, The Cold War Is Over (New York: Random House, 1990), p. 63. 

3. Joseph Stalin, “Economic Problems of Socialism in the U.S.S.R.,” in Bruce Franklin, ed., 
The Essential Stalin: Major Theoretical Writings 1905-1952 (New York: Anchor Books, 
1972), p. 471. 

4 . Ibid. 

5 . Ibid. 

6. “Note from the Soviet Union to the United States Transmitting a Soviet Draft of a Peace 
Treaty with Germany, March 10, 1952,” in U.S. Department of State, Documents on Ger- 
many 1944-1985 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, undated), Depart- 
ment of State Publication #9446, pp. 361-64. 

7 . Ibid. 

8 . “Note from the United States to the Soviet Union Proposing Creation of a Freely-Elected 
All-German Government Prior to Negotiation of a Peace Treaty, March 25, 1952,” in ibid., 
pp. 364-65. 

9 . “Note from the Soviet Union to the United States Proposing Four-Power Rather Than 
United Nations Investigation of Conditions for Free All-German Elections, April 9, 1952,” 
in ibid., pp. 365-67; “Note from the United States to the Soviet Union Reasserting the 
Authority of the United Nations to Investigate Conditions for Free All-German Elections, 
May 13, 1952,” in ibid, pp. 368-71; “Note from the Soviet Union to the United States 
Proposing Simultaneous Four-Power Discussion of a German Peace Treaty, German Reuni- 
fication, and Formation of an All-German Government, May 24, 1952,” in ibid., pp. 374-78; 
“Note from the United States to the Soviet Union Reasserting the Need to Investigate 


858 



Notes 


Conditions for Holding Free All-German Elections as a First Step Toward German Reunifi- 
cation, July 10, 1952,” in ibid , pp. 385-88; “Note from the Soviet Union to the United States 
Proposing a Four-Power Meeting to Discuss a German Peace Treaty, Formation of an All- 
German Government, and the Holding of All-German Elections, August 23, 1952,” in ibid., 
pp. 388-93; “Note from the United States to the Soviet Union Urging ‘a Single-Minded 
Effort ... to Come to Grips with the Problem of Free Elections in Germany, September 23, 
1952,” in ibid., pp. 395-97. 

10 . Stalin’s Remarks at the Closing Session of the Nineteenth Congress of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union, October 14, 1952, Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. IV, no. 
38 (November 1, 1952), pp. 9-10. 

11 . Alan Bullock, Hitler and Stalin : Parallel Lives (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1992), 
p. 968. 

12 . Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, with an Introduction, Commentary, and 
Notes by Edward Crankshaw, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott (Boston: Little, Brown, 
1970), pp. 392-94. 

13. Council on Foreign Relations, The United States and World Affairs, 1953, p. 116. 

14 . John Colville, The Fringes of Power : 10 Doubling Street Diaries, 1939-1955 (New 
York/London: W. W. Norton, 1985), p. 654. 

15 . Quoted in Martin Gilbert, Winston S. Churchill: Never Despair, 1945-1965 (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1988), p. 510. 

16 . Remarks at the White House, February 16, 1950, in US. Department of State Bulletin, 
vol. XXII, no. 559 (March 20, 1950), pp. 427-29. 

17 . Colville, Fringes of Power, p. 650. 

18 . Peter G. Boyle, ed., The Churchill-Eisenhower Correspondence, 1953-55 (Chapel Hill, 
N.C./London: University of North Carolina Press, 1990), p. 36. 

19 . Address “The Chance for Peace,” delivered before the American Society of Newspaper 
Editors, Washington, D.C., April 16, 1953, in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 
States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1953 vol. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
I960), pp. 179-88 (hereinafter cited as Eisenhower Papers). The story of the drafting of the 
Eisenhower speech is told in W. W. Rostow, Europe After Stalin: Eisenhower's Three Deci- 
sions of March 11, 1953 (Austin, Tex.: University of Texas Press, 1982). 

20 . Letter to Eisenhower, May 4, 1953, in Boyle, ed., Churchill-Eisenhower Correspon- 
dence, p. 48. 

21 . Letter to Churchill, May 5, 1953, in ibid, p. 49. 

22 . Speech to the House of Commons, May 11, 1953, in Robert Rhodes James, ed., Winston 
S. Churchill: His Complete Speeches, 1897-1963 , vol. VIII, 1950-1963 (New York/London: 
Chelsea House in association with R. R. Bowker, 1974), p. 8483. 

23. Ibid., p. 8484. 

24. Boyle, ed., Churchill-Eisenhower Correspondence, p. 83. 

25 . Ibid 

26 . George F. Kennan, “Disengagement Revisited,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 37, no. 2 (January 
1959), pp. 187-210. See also Acheson’s view in Dean Acheson, “The Illusion of Disen- 
gagement,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 36, no. 3 (April 1958), pp. 371-82. 

27 . Ibid. 

28 . Henry A. Kissinger, “Missiles and the Western Alliance,” in ibid., pp. 383-400. 

29 . Quoted in Emmet John Hughes, The Ordeal of Power: A Political Memoir of tbe 
Eisenhower Years (New York: Atheneum, 1963), p. 109. 

30 . Radio and Television Address to the American People Prior to Departure for the Big 
Four Conference at Geneva, July 15, 1955, in Eisenhower Papers, 1955 vol., p. 703. 

31 . Editorial, New York Times, July 25, 1955. 

32 . Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 3, 1955, 
10.01 a.m., “Call of the British Foreign Secretary re: Soviet-Egyptian Arms Agreement,” in 
“Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1955,” Foreign Relations of the United States, vol. XIV, p. 545. 

33 . Closing statement at Geneva Foreign Ministers’ Conference, November 16, 1955, in 
Documents on International Affairs, Noble Frankland, ed., 1955 vol. (London: Oxford 
University Press, 1958), pp. 73-77. 


859 



Notes 


34 . Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, p. 400. 

35 . Khrushchev report to the 20th Party Congress, Pravda, February 15, 1956, in Current 
Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. VIII, no. 4 (March 7, 1956), pp. 4, 6, 7. 

36 . Andrei Gromyko, Memories, translated by Harold Shukman (London: Hutchinson, 
1989). 


CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 

Leapfrogging Containment: The Suez Crisis 

1. Andrei Zhdanov, “The International Situation,” delivered at the Founding Conference 
of the Cominform, September 1947, in U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on 
Foreign Affairs, The Strategy and Tactics of World Communism, Supplement I, “One 
Hundred Years of Communism, 1848-1948,” 80th Cong., 2nd sess., doc. no. 619 (Washing- 
ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1948), pp. 213-14. 

2 . Churchill remarks in the House of Commons, April 19, 1951, in Robert Rhodes James, 
ed., Winston S. Churchill: His Complete Speeches, 1897-1963 vol. VIII, 1950—1963 (New 
York/London: Chelsea House in association with R. R. Bowker, 1974), p. 8193. 

3. See Keith Kyle, Suez (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1991), pp. 70ff. 

4. Ibid., p. 85. 

5 . See ibid., pp. 89ff. 

6. Quoted in ibid., p. 130. 

7. Quoted in ibid. 

8 . Nasser Speech, Alexandria, July 26, 1956, in Noble Frankland, ed., Documents on Inter- 
national Affairs, 1956 (London/New York/Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1959, issued 
under the auspices of the Royal Institute of International Affairs), p. 80. 

9 . Ibid., p. 113; see also Kyi o,Suez, p. 134. 

10 . Quoted in Kyle, Suez, p. 115. 

11 . Anthony Eden, Full Circle: The Memoirs of the Rt. Hon. Sir Anthony Eden (London: 
Cassell, I960), p. 427. 

12 . Parliamentary Debates (Hansard), 5th ser., vol. 557, House of Commons, Session 
1955-56 (London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1956), col. 919. 

13 . Kyle, Suez, p. 145. 

14. Eden, Full Circle, p. 437. 

15 . Quoted in Alistair Horne, Harold Macmillan, Volume /. 1894-1956 (New York: 
Penguin Books, 1991), p. 405. 

16 . Eisenhower letter to Eden, July 1, 1956, in Dwight D. Eisenhower, Waging Peace . The 
White House Years 1956—1961 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), pp. 664-65; see also 
Kyle, Suez, p. 160. 

17 . Quoted in Louis L. Gerson John Foster Dulles, The American Secretaries of State and 
Their Diplomacy, vol. XVII (New York: Cooper Square Publishers, 1967), p. xi. 

18 . Quoted in ibid., p. 28. 

19 - Stephen E. Ambrose, Eisenhower, vol. two, The President (New York: Simon & Schus- 
ter, 1984), p. 21. 

20 . Gerson, Dulles, p. xii. 

21 . Dulles statement of August 3, 1956, in U.S. Department of State, The Suez Canal 
Problem, July 26-September 22, 1956: A Documentary » Publication (Washington, D.C.: 
Department of State, 1956), p. 37 (hereinafter cited as Suez Canal Problem). 

22 . Dulles remarks in radio-TV address, August 3, 1956, in ibid, p. 42. 

23- Dulles remarks as reported in New York Times, October 3, 1956, p. 8. 

24 . Eden, Full Circle, p. 498. 

25 . Eisenhower, Waging Peace, p. 667. 

26. Quoted in Suez Canal Problem, p. 344. 

27. Quoted in Kyle, Suez, p. 185. 

28 . “The People Ask the President,” television broadcast, October 12, 1956, in Public 
Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1956 vol. (Washing- 
ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office), p. 903 (hereinafter cited as Eisenhower 
Papers). 


860 



Notes 


29. See, e.g., Eisenhower, Waging Peace, pp. 676-77. 

30. US. Department of State Bulletin, vol. XXXV, no. 907 (November 12, 1956), p. 750. 

31. Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Radio and Television Report to the American People on the 
Developments in Eastern Europe and the Middle East,” in Eisenhower Papers, 1956 vol., 
p. 1064. 

32. Frankland, ed., Documents on International Affairs, p. 289. 

33. Ibid. 

34. Ibid., p. 292. 

35. Ibid., p. 293. 

36. Eisenhower Papers, 1956 vol., p. 1066. 

37. Dulles press conference remarks, December 18, 1956, in State Bulletin, vol. XXXVI, 
no. 915 (January 7, 1956), p. 5* 

38. Quoted in Kyle, Suez, p. 426. 

39. Quoted in ibid. 

40. Quoted in Herman Finer, Dulles over Suez: The Theory > and Practice of His Diplomacy 
(Chicago: Quadrangle Books, 1964), p. 397. 

41. Quoted in Kyle, Suez, p. 477. 

42. Quoted in ibid., p. 495. 

43. Quoted in ibid., p. 467. 

44. “US Support for Baghdad Pact,” Department of State press release 604, November 29, 
1956, in State Bulletin, vol. XXXV, no. 91 1 (December 10, 1956), p. 918. 

45. Special Message to the Congress on the Situation in the Middle East, January 5, 1957, 
in Eisenhower Papers, 1957 vol., pp. 6-16. 

46. Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union, January 10, 1957, in ibid., 
p. 29. 


CHAPTER TWENTY- WO 

Hungary: Upheaval in the Empire 

1. Quoted in John Lewis Gaddis, The Long Peace (New York/London: Oxford University 
Press, 1987), p. 157. 

2. Life, May 19, 1952. 

3. Tibor Meray, Thirteen Days That Shook the Kremlin, translated by Howard Katzander 
(New York: Frederick A. Praeger, 1959), p. 7. 

4. Quoted in Melvin J. Lasky, ed., The Hungarian Revolution (New York: Frederick A. 
Praeger, 1957), p. 126. 

5. Appeal to the President of the Security Council, October 27, 1956, in US. Department 
of State Bulletin (November 12, 1956), p. 757. 

6. Quoted in Meray, Thirteen Days, p. 140. 

7. Ibid, p. 169. 

8 . John Foster Dulles, “The Task of Waging Peace,” address before the Dallas Council on 
World Affairs, October 27, 1956, in State Bulletin, vol. XXXV, no. 906 (November 5, 1956), 
p. 697. 

9. Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Radio and Television Report to the American People on the 
Developments in Eastern Europe and the Middle East,” October 31, 1956, in Public Papers 
of tbe Presidents of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1956 vol. (Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1958), p. 1061 (hereinafter cited as Eisenhower Papers). 
(Emphasis added.) 

10. Ibid. 

11. Ibid., p. 1062. 

12. Declaration of the Government of the U.S.S.R. of October 30, 1956, “On the Principles 
of Development and Further Strengthening of Friendship and Cooperation Between 
the Soviet Union and Other Socialist States,” appearing in Pravda and Izvestia, October 
31, 1956, in Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. VIII, no. 40 (November 14, 1956), 

p. 11. 

13. Eisenhower Papers, 1956 vol., p. 1062. 

14. Government of the U.S.S.R., “On the Principles,” p. 11. 


861 



Notes 


15. Quoted in Paul E. Zinner, ed., National Communism and Popular Revolt in Eastern 
Europe (New York: Columbia University Press, 1956), p. 463. 

16 . Full Nehru speech in Lok Sabha Debates, pt. II, vol. 9, no. 3, colls. 260-67, in Royal 
Institute of International Affairs, vol. IV, no. 7, pp. 328-30. 

17 . Secretary Dulles’ News Conference of December 18, 1956, in State Bulletin , vol. 
XXXVI, no. 915 (January 7, 1957), pp. 3-4. 

18 . Secretary Dulles’ News Conference, Canberra, March 13, 1957, in State Bulletin, vol. 
XXXVI, no. 927 (April 1, 1957), p. 533. 

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 

Khrushchev’s Ultimatum: The Berlin Crisis 1958-63 

1. Nikita S. Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers: The Last Testament, with an introduction 
by Edward Crankshaw and Jerrold Schecter, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott (Bos- 
ton: Little, Brown, 1974), p. 301. 

2 . John Foster Dulles, “Freedom’s New Task,” address to Philadelphia Bulletin Forum, 
February 26, 1956, in US. Department of State Bulletin, vol. XXXIV, no. 871 (March 5, 
1956), pp. 363-64. 

3 . Quoted in William G. Hyland, The Cold War Is Over (New York: Random House, 1990), 
p. 97. 

4. U.S. Senate, Khrushchev on the Shifting Balance of World Forces, A Special Study Pre- 
sented by Senator Hubert H. Humphrey, 86th Cong., 1st sess., Senate Doc. no. 57 (Washing- 
ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1959), excerpts from Khrushchev interview 
with W. Sinnbeck, editor of Dansk Folkstyre, January 1958, p. 8. 

5 . Ibid. (Khrushchev remarks to the Seventh Congress of the Bulgarian Communist Party, 
June 4, 1958), p. 7. 

6. Nikita S. Khrushchev, “Our Strength Lies in Fraternal Unity,” address to Friendship 
Meeting of Peoples of Soviet Union and Polish People’s Republic, November 10, 1958, 
reprinted in Pravda, November 11, 1958, in Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. X, no. 
45 (December 17, 1958), p. 9. 

7 . Soviet Note of November 27, 1958, in Documents on American Foreign Relations, ed. 
by Paul E. Zinner (New York: Published for the Council on Foreign Relations by Harper & 
Brothers, 1959), pp. 220-31. 

8 . Khrushchev, Speech to the 21st Party Congress published in Pravda, January 28, 1959, 
in Current Digest, vol. XI, no. 4 (March 4, 1959), p. 19- 

9« As recounted by de Gaulle, in Charles de Gaulle, Memoirs of Hope: Renewal 
and Endeavor, translated by Terence Kilmartin (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1971), 
p. 223. 

10 . Konrad Adenauer, Erinnerungen, 1955-1959 (Stuttgart, 1967), pp. 473-74. 

11 . Harold Macmillan, Pointing the Way, 1959-1961 (New York: Harper & Row, 1972), 

p. 101. 

12 . Eisenhower News Conference of March 11, 1959, in Public Papers of the Presidents of 
the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1959 vol. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, I960), p. 244. 

13 . Eisenhower News Conference of February 18, 1959, in ibid., p. 196. 

14 . Eisenhower News Conference of March 11, 1959, in ibid., p. 245. 

15. The Berlin Crises 1958-1961, Documentary* Collection for Oral History > Session (Har- 
vard University, 1990), 2 pans, compiled by William Burr, David Rosenberg, and Georg 
Schild; Burr, “Select Chronology,” pt. 1, March 9, 1959, entry (hereinafter cited as Berlin 
Crises project). 

16 . De Gaulle press conference, September 5, 1961, in Documents on Interna- 
tional Affairs: 1961, ed. by D. C. Watt, John Major, Richard Gott, and George Schopflin 
(London: Oxford University Press for the Royal Institute of International Affairs, 1965), 

p. 111. 

17 . Press Conference on September 5, I960, in ibid., pp. 84-85. 

18 . De Gaulle, Memoirs of Hope, p. 223. 


862 



Notes 


19 . Berlin Crises project, pt. 2, Burr entry for November 24, 1958, Dulles to Adenauer. 

20 . Dulles’ News Conference, November 26, 1958, in State Bulletin, vol. XXXIX, no. 1016 
(December 15, 1958), pp. 947ff. 

21 . Dulles’ News Conference, January 13, 1959, in State Bulletin, vol. XL, no. 1023 (Febru- 
ary 2, 1959), p. 161. 

22 . Ibid. 

23 . Berlin Crises project, pt. 1, Burr entry for November 27, 1958, reporting on Brandt’s 
late November 26 reaction to Dulles’ November 26, 1958, news conference. 

24. Marc Trachtenberg, “The Berlin Crisis,” in ibid., p. 39, recounting Bruce to Dulles 
message of January 14, 1959. 

25 . Entry in ibid., Burr, January 13, 1959, recounting Herbert Dittman talk with Livingston 
Merchant. 

26 . Khrushchev Speech at Leipzig, March 7, 1959, in Current Digest, vol. XI, no. 13 (April 
29, 1959), p. 5. 

27. Berlin Crises project, Trachtenberg essay, p. 46. 

28 . Ibid., p. 47. 

29 . Ibid. 

30 . Quoted in Jean Edward Smith, The Defense of Berlin (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni- 
versity Press, 1963), pp. 212-13. 

31 . Newsweek, October 5, 1959, p. 19. 

32 . Khrushchev speech before 10,000 Hungarian workers in “Khrushchev Cites ’56 Krem- 
lin Split on Hungary Move,” New York Times, December 3, 1959, p. 1. 

33 . Gordon Gray, “Memorandum of Meeting with the President,” in Berlin Crises project, 
Trachtenberg essay, p. 47. 

34. Hyland, Cold War Is Over ; pp. 120-21. 

35 . Ibid., p. 120. 

36. Quoted in Michael R. Beschloss, The Crisis Years: Kennedy and Khrushchev 1960- 
1963 (New York: HarperCollins, 1991), p. 225. 

37 . Kennedy to Rusk memo, August 21, 1961, quoted in Berlin Crises project, Trachtenb- 
erg essay, p. 78. 

38 . Bundy to Kennedy memo, August 28, 1961, quoted in ibid. 

39 . “U.S. Source Advises Bonn to Talk to East Germany,” New York Times, September 23, 
1961, p. 1. 

40 . McGeorge Bundy, “Policy for the Western Alliance — Berlin and After,” address to the 
Economic Club of Chicago, December 6, 1961, in State Bulletin, vol. XLVI, no. 1185 (March 
12, 1962), p. 424. 

41 . Henry A. Kissinger, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy (New York: Published for 
the Council on Foreign Relations by Harper & Brothers, 1957). 

42 . Excerpts of Adenauer’s May 7, 1962, press conference, reprinted thereafter in New 
York Times, May 13, 1962, sect. IV, p. 5. 

43 . Ibid., May 8, 1962, p. 4. 

44 . Quoted in Beschloss, Crisis Years, p. 400. 

45 . Acheson letter to Truman, September 21, 1961, in Berlin Crises project, Trachtenberg 
essay, p. 82. 

46. Acheson letter to General Lucius Clay, in ibid., pp. 82-83. 

47. Berlin Crises project, pt. 2, Burr, entry for August 26, 1959, regarding State Department 
intelligence report, “Germany and the Western Alliance.” 

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 

Concepts of Western Unity: Macmillan, de Gaulle, Eisenhower, 

and Kennedy 

1. Quoted in George F. Kennan, Memoirs, 1950-1963, vol. II (Boston/Toronto: Little, 
Brown, 1972), p. 253. 

2 . Address by Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin at Albert Hall, May 27, 1935, reported in 
London Times, May 28, 1935, p. 18. 


863 



Notes 


3. On the Acheson speech at West Point, December 5, 1962, see Douglas Brinkley, Dean 
Acheson. The Cold War Years, 1953-71 (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1992), 
pp. 175-82. 

4 . Harold Macmillan, Riding the Storm, 1956-1959 (New York: Harper & Row, 1971), 
p. 586. 

5 . Harold Macmillan, Pointing the Way, 1959-1961 (New York: Harper & Row, 1972), 

p. 101. 

6. Macmillan, Riding the Storm, p. 577. This was also more or less Eisenhower’s reaction 
as to substance. 

7. Macmillan, Pointing the Way, p. 82. 

8. Harold Macmillan, At the End of the Day, 1961-1963 (New York: Harper & Row, 1974), 
p. 357. 

9 . Text, Joint Communique, and Attached Statement on Nuclear Defense Systems issued 
on December 21, 1962, by President Kennedy and Prime Minister Macmillan, US. Depart- 
ment of State Bulletin, vol. XLVIII, no. 1229 (January 14, 1963), p. 44. 

10 . Some of the material on France and de Gaulle is adapted from the author’s The 
Troubled Partnership: A Re-appraisal of the Atlantic Alliance (New York: Published for the 
Council on Foreign Relations by McGraw-Hill, 1965), pp. 4lff; and author’s White House 
Years (Boston: Little, Brown, 1979), pp. 104fF. 

11 . “Address by President Charles de Gaulle Outlining the Principles of French Foreign 
Policy Following the Failure of the Summit Conference,” May 31, I960, in Major Addresses, 
Statements, and Press Conferences of General Charles de Gaulle, May 19, 1958-January 
31, 1964 (New York: French Embassy, Press and Information Division, 1964), p. 75. 

12 . De Gaulle Press Conference on April 11, 1961, in ibid., p. 124. 

13 . Press Conference on July 29, 1963, in ibid., pp. 233-34. 

14 . Press Conference on March 25, 1959, in ibid., p. 43. 

15 . Quoted in Brian Crozier, De Gaulle (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1973), pp. 
533f. See also Dwight D. Eisenhower, Waging Peace: The White House Years, 1956-1961 
(Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), pp. 424-31. 

16 . Charles de Gaulle, Memoirs of Hope .- Renewal and Endeavor ; trans. by Terence Kil- 
martin (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1971), pp. 229-30. 

17 . Quoted in Crozier, De Gaulle, p. 525. 

18 . George Ball, “NATO and World Responsibility,” The Atlantic Community Quarterly, 
vol. 2, no. 2 (Summer 1964), p. 211. 

19 . For a detailed discussion of this idea, see Kissinger, Troubled Partnership, pp. 127ff. 

20 . Kennedy’s Address at Independence Hall, Philadelphia, July 4, 1962, in Public 
Papers of the Presidents of the United States, John F. Kennedy, 1962 vol. (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1963), pp. 537-39. 

21 . Kennedy Address in the Assembly Hall at the Paulskirche in Frankfurt, June 25, 1963, 
in ibid., 1963 vol., p. 520. 

22 . De Gaulle Press Conference on January 14, 1963, in Major Addresses, pp. 216-17. 

23 . Press Conference on January 14, 1963, in ibid., p. 218. 

24. Press Conference on April 19, 1963, quoted in Harold van B. Cleveland, The Atlantic 
Idea and Its European Rivals (New York: Published for the Council on Foreign Relations 
by McGraw-Hill, 1966), p. 143. 

25 . “The Common Declaration and the Treaty Between the French Republic and the 
Federal Republic of Germany,” January 22, 1963, quoted in Roy Macridis, De Gaulle, 
Implacable Ally (New York: Harper & Row, 1966), p. 188. 

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 

Vietnam: Entry into the Morass; Truman and Eisenhower 

1. Inaugural Address, January 20, 1949, in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 
States: Harry S Truman, 1949 vol. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
1964), pp. 112-14. 

2 . Inaugural Address, January 20, 1953, in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 


864 



Notes 


States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1953 vol. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
I960), p. 6 (hereinafter cited as Eisenhower Papers). 

3. Ibid, p. 7. 

4. Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961, in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 
States: John F. Kennedy, 1961 vol. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 

1962), p. 1. 

5. Inaugural Address, January 20, 1965, in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United 
States : Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965 vol. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 
1966), p. 72. 

6. See Dean Acheson, “The Peace the World Wants,” address to United Nations General 
Assembly, September 20, 1950, U.S. Department of State Bulletin, vol. XXIII, no. 587 (Octo- 
ber 2, 1950), p. 524; and Dulles, quoted in Jeffrey P. Kimball, ed., To Reason Why: The 
Debate About the Causes of U.S. Involvement in the Vietnam War (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1990), p. 54. 

7. Quoted in Kimball, To Reason Why, p. 73. 

8 . Ibid [ 

9 . Quoted in Thomas J. Schoenbaum, Waging Peace and War: Dean Rusk in the Truman, 
Kennedy and Johnson Years (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1988), p. 234. 

10. NSC 68, “United States Objectives and Programs for National Security,” April 7, 1950, 
in U.S. Department of State, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1950, vol. I (Washington, 
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1977), pp. 237-38. 

11. See William Roger Louis, Imperialism at Bay. The United States and the Decoloniza- 
tion of the British Empire, 1941-1945 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), chh. 1 
and 2. 

12. George C. Herring, America's Longest War, The United States and Vietnam 1950— 
1975 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2nd ed., 1986), p. 18. 

13 . Ibid 

14 . Schoenbaum, Waging Peace and War, p. 230. 

15. Herring , America's Longest War, pp. 18-19. 

16. Ibid., p. 19. 

17. “United States Objectives and Courses of Action with Respect to Southeast Asia,” 
Statement of Policy by the National Security Council, 1952, in Neil Sheehan, Hedrick Smith, 
W. W. Kenworthy, Fox Butterfield, The Pentagon Papers, as Published by the New York 
Times (New York: Quadrangle Books, 1971), p. 29. 

18. Ibid., p. 28. 

19 - Ibid., p. 29. 

20. Quoted in Herring , America’s Longest War, p. 22. 

21 . Quoted in ibid., p. 26. 

22. Ibid., p. 27. 

23 . Quoted in Sir Robert Thompson, Revolutionary War in World Strategy 1945-1969 
(New York: Taplinger, 1970), p. 120. 

24 . Quoted in Stanley Kamow, Vietnam: A Histoiy> (New York: Penguin Books, 1984), pp. 
197-98. 

25. Quoted in William Bragg Ewald, Jr., Eisenhower the President: Crucial Days, 1951- 
1960 (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1981), pp. 119-20. 

26. Eisenhower to Churchill, April 4, 1954, in Peter G. Boyle, ed., The Churchill-Eisen- 
hower Correspondence, 1953-1955 (Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina 
Press, 1990), pp. 137-40. 

27. Anthony Eden, Full Circle. The Memoirs of the Rt. Hon. Anthony Eden (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1960), p. 124. 

28. Quoted in Martin Gilbert, Winston S. Churchill, vol. VIII, “Never Despair,” 1945-1965 
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1988), pp. 973-74. 

29 . Quoted in ibid., p. 973. 

30. Quoted in ibid. 

31 . Townsend Hoopes, The Devil and John Foster Dulles (Boston: Little, Brown, 1973), 
p. 239. 


865 



Notes 


32. Richard M. Nixon, No More Vietnams (New York: Arbor House, 1985), p. 41. 

33. Dulles at London press conference, April 13, 1954, quoted in Hoopes, Devil and John 
Foster Dulles, p. 209. 

34. Ibid., p. 222. 

35. Quoted in Herring, America's Longest War, p. 39. 

36 . Dulles instructions to Undersecretary Walter Bedell Smith, May 12, 1954, in connection 
with the Geneva conference, in The Pentagon Papers, p. 44. 

37. U.S. Declaration on Indochina, July 21, 1954, in State Bulletin, vol. XXXI, no. 788 
(August 2, 1954), p. 162. 

38. Herring , America’s Longest War, p. 45. 

39 . Eisenhower letter to Diem, October 23, 1954, in Marvin E. Gettleman, ed., Viet Nam: 
History, Documents, and Opinions on a Major World Crisis (Greenwich, Conn.: Fawcett 
Publications, 1965), pp. 204-5. 

40. Herring, A mericas Longest War, p. 56. 

41. Senator Mike Mansfield, “Reprieve in Vietnam,” Harper’s, January 1956, p. 50. 

42. Senator John F. Kennedy, “America’s Stake in Vietnam, the Cornerstone of the Free 
World in Southeast Asia,” address delivered before the American Friends of Vietnam, 
Washington, D.C.,June 1, 1956, in Vital Speeches of the Day, August 1, 1956, pp. 6l7ff. 

43. Herring, Americas Longest War, p. 68 . 

44. Dwight D. Eisenhower, Waging Peace: The White House Years, 1956-1961 (Garden 
City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965), p. 607. 

45. Ibid., p. 610. 

46. “Address at the Gettysburg College Convocation: The Importance of Understanding,” 
April 4, 1959, in Eisenhower Papers, 1959 vol. (I960), p. 313. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX 

Vietnam: On the Road to Despair; Kennedy and Johnson 

1. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, John F. Kennedy, 1961 vol. (Washing- 
ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1962), p. 23 (hereinafter cited as Kennedy 
Papers). 

2. Lin Piao, “Long Live the Victory of People’s War!,” Peking Review, vol. VIII, no. 36 
(September 3, 1965), pp. 9-30. 

3. Quoted in David Halberstam, The Best and the Brightest (New York: Random House, 
1972), p. 76. 

4. From Kennedy’s opening statement at a news conference of March 23, 1961, in Kennedy > 
Papers, 1961 vol. (1962), p. 214. 

5. Special Message to Congress on the Defense Budget, March 28, 1961, in ibid., p. 230. 

6 . “Let the Word Go Forth ” The Speeches, Statements, and Writings of John F. Kennedy, 
1947—1963, selected and with an introduction by Theodore C. Sorensen (New York: Dell 
Publishing, 1988), p. 371. 

7. Ibid., pp. 370ff. 

8 . Senator John F. Kennedy, “America’s Stake in Vietnam, the Cornerstone of the Free 
World in Southeast Asia,” address delivered before the American Friends of Vietnam, 
Washington, D.C., June 1, 1956, in Vital Speeches of the Day, August 1, 1956, pp. 617-19. 

9. Lyndon Baines Johnson, The Vantage Point. Perspectives of the Presidency 1963-1969 
(New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971), p. 55. 

10. National Security Memorandum 52, signed by McGeorge Bundy, Presidential Adviser 
on National Security, May 11, 1961, in Neil Sheehan, Hedrick Smith, W. W. Kenworthy, Fox 
Butterfield, The Pentagon Papers as Published by the New York Times (New York: Quadran- 
gle Books, 1971), p. 131. 

11. Johnson to Kennedy memo, “Mission to Southeast Asia, India and Pakistan,” May 23, 
1961, in Pentagon Papers, p. 134. 

12. Bundy, quoted in Pentagon Papers, p. 103. 

13. McNamara memo to Kennedy, November 8 , 1961, in Pentagon Papers, p. 154. 


866 



Notes 


14 . Quoted in George C. Herring, America 's Longest War: The United States and Vietnam 
1950-1975 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2nd ed., 1985), p. 83. 

15. Quoted in ibid., p. 86. 

16 . Kennedy’s Special Message to Congress on Defense Policies and Principles, March 28, 
1961, in Kennedy Papers, 1961 vol. (1962), pp. 229ff. 

17 . Quoted in Gu enter Lewy, America in Vietnam (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1978), p. 26. 

18 . State Department telegram to Lodge in Saigon, August 24, 1963, in Pentagon Papers, 

p. 200. 

19 . Ibid. 

20 . “Opportunity in Vietnam,” editorial, The New York Times, November 3, 1963, sect. 4, 
p. 8E. 

21 . Quoted in Lew, America in Vietnam, p. 28. 

22 . Quoted in ibid., p. 29. 

23 . Harrison Salisbury, Behind the Lines — Hanoi (New York: Harper & Row, 1967), pp. 
194-97. 

24. Edgar Snow, “Interview with Mao,” The New Republic, February 27, 1965, p. 17. 

25 . Johnson Address to the American Alumni Council, July 12, 1966, in Public Papers of 
the Presidents of the United States, Lyndon B. Johnson, 1966 vol. II (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1967) p. 720 (hereinafter cited as Johnson Papers ). 

26 . Ibid. 

27 . Johnson Address at Johns Hopkins University, April 7, 1965, in Johnson Papers, 1965 
vol. I (1966), pp. 396-97. 

28 . Johnson Address on Vietnam to the National Legislative Conference, San Antonio, 
Texas, September 29, 1967, in Johnson Papers, 1967 vol. II (1968), p. 879. 

29 . Walter Lippmann, “On Defeat,” Newsweek, March 11, 1968, p. 25. 

30 . Fulbright address, “U.S. Is in Danger of Losing Its Perspective,” to the School of 
Advanced International Studies, Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C., May 5, 1966, 
as reprinted in U.S. News & World Report, vol. LX, no. 21 (May 23, 1966), pp. 114-15. 

31 . J. William Fulbright speech, “Old Myths and New Realities,” delivered in the United 
States Senate, March 25, 1964, reprinted in Vital Speeches of the Day, April 16, 1964, pp. 
393-94. 

32. Richard L. Renfield, “A Policy for Vietnam,” Yale Law Review, vol. LVI, no. 4 (J un e 
1967), pp. 481-505. 

33 . James Reston, “Washington: The Flies That Captured the Flypaper,” New York Times, 
February 7, 1968, p. 46. 

34. Senator J. William Fulbright, The Crippled Giant: American Foreign Policy and Its 
Domestic Consequences (New York: Random House, 1972), p. 62. 

35 . For a brilliant analysis of this group, see Norman Podhoretz, Why We Were in Vietnam 
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1982), pp. 85ff. 

36. Quoted in ibid., p. 100. 

37. Quoted in ibid., p. 105. 

38 . David Halberstam, The Making of a Quagmire (New York: Random House, 1965), 

p. 319. ‘ 

39 . Lewy, American in Vietnam, p. 76; Don Oberdorfer, Te/ 1 / (Garden City, N.Y.: Double- 
day, 1971), pp. 329ff. 

40 . Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., Robert Kennedy and His Times (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
1978), p.843. 

41 . “Report from Vietnam by Walter Cronkite,” CBS News special, February 27, 1968, 
quoted in Oberdorfer, Tetf, p. 251. 

42 . “The Logic of the Battlefield,” Wall Street Journal, February 23, 1968, p. 14. 

43 . “Frank Magee Sunday Report,” NBC, March 10, 1968, quoted in Oberdorfer, Tetf, 
p. 273. 

44. “The War,” Time, vol. 91, no. 11 (March 15, 1968), p. 14. 

45 . Mansfield statement in the Senate, March 7, 1968, in Congressional Record, vol. 114, 
pt. 5 (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1968), p. 5659. 


867 



Notes 


46. Fulbright statement in the Senate, March 7, 1968, ibid., p. 5645. 

47. Johnson television broadcast to the American people, March 31, 1968, in Johnson 
Papers, 1968-69 vol. I (1970), pp. 469-96. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN 

Vietnam: The Extrication; Nixon 

1. Walter Isaacson, Kissinger: A Biography (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992), p. 484. 

2. The memorandum is printed in its entirety in the chapter notes to Henry Kissinger, 
White House Years (Boston: Little, Brown, 1979), pp. 1480-82. 

3. Quoted in ibid., p. 1481. 

4. All American withdrawal schemes were made conditional on a cease-fire and the release 
of all prisoners. 

5. Senator J. William Fulbright, The Crippled Giant : American Foreign Policy and Its 
Domestic Consequences (New York: Random House, 1972), p. 62. 

6. McGovern remarks on “The Today Show,” NBC TV, June 8, 1972. 

7. Quoted in Kissinger, White House Years, p. 1345. 

8. Kissinger News Conference, January 24, 1973, in US. Department of State Bulletin, vol. 
LXVIII, no. 1753 (February 12, 1973), p. 164. 

9. See Kissinger, White House Years, chh. VIII and XII; Henry Kissinger, Years of Upheaval 
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), chh. II and VIII; and Peter W. Rodman’s exchange with 
William Shawcross in American Spectator, March and July 1981. 

10. See Karl D. Jackson, ed., Cambodia 1975-1978. Rendezvous with Death (Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989). 

11. See Kissinger, White House Years, pp. 1362ff. 

12. See summary of U.S. statements in Kissinger, Years of Upheaval, pp. 1236-40. 

13. “Fourth Annual Report to the Congress on United States Foreign Policy,” May 3, 1973, 
in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Richard Nixon, 1973 vol. (Washing- 
ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1975), p. 392. 

14. Ibid., p. 395. 

15. Second Supplemental Appropriations Bill for FY1973 (HR 9055-PL93-50). See Congres- 
sional Quarterly, 1973 Almanac, 93d Cong., 1st sess. (Washington, D.C.: Congressional 
Quarterly, 1974), pp. 95, 861-62. 

16. Joseph Fitchett, “Saigon Residents Found Intimidated by ‘Occupation Force,’ ” Wash- 
ington Post, November 6, 1978; see also Christopher Dickey, “Former Vietnamese Captive 
Describes Life — and Death — in Saigon Prison,” Washington Post, December 20, 1978; 
Theodore Jacqueney, “They Are Us, Were We Vietnamese,” Worldview, April 1977; Carl 
Gershman, “A Voice from Vietnam,” New Leader, January 29, 1979, pp. 8-9- 

17. International Institute of Strategic Studies, Strategic Survey, 1975 (London: IISS, 1975), 
p. 94. 

18. See the forthcoming book by Peter W. Rodman on the Cold War in the Third World, 
to be published by Charles Scribner’s Sons, for a fuller discussion of this evolution of 
Soviet policy. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT 

Foreign Policy as Geopolitics: Nixon’s Triangular Diplomacy 

1. Richard Nixon, quoted in Time, January 3, 1972, p. 15. See also Nixon’s remarks to 
Midwestern News Media Executives in Kansas City, Missouri, July 6, 1971, in Public Papers 
of the Presidents of the United States, Richard Nixon, 1971 vol. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1972), p. 806 (hereinafter cited as Nixon Papers). 

2. Remarks at Presidential Prayer Breakfast, February 5, 1970, in Nixon Papers, 1970 
vol., pp. 82-83. 

3. Radio and Television Address to the People of the Soviet Union, May 28, 1972, in Nixon 
Papers, 1972 vol., p. 630. 


868 



Notes 


4 . Nixon’s Informal Remarks in Guam with Newsmen, July 25, 1969, in Nixon Papers, 1969 
vol., pp. 544-56. 

5 . Address to the Nation on the War in Vietnam, November 3, 1969, in ibid., pp. 905-6. 
See also Nixon’s First Annual Report to the Congress on United States Foreign Policy for 
the 1970’s, February 18, 1970, in Nixon Papers, 1970 vol., pp. 116ff. 

6. Norman Mailer, The Armies of the Night: History as a Novel, the Novel as History (New 
York: New American Library, 1968), p. 187. 

7 . John Kenneth Galbraith, The New Industrial State (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967), 
ch. XXXV. 

8. First Annual Report to the Congress on United States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s, 
February 18, 1970, in Nixon Papers, 1970 vol., p. 119. 

9. Ibid., p. 178. 

10 - Ibid., p. 179. 

11 . Second Annual Report to the Congress on United States Foreign Policy, February 25, 
1971, in Nixon Papers, 1971 vol., p. 304. 

12 . Albert Wohlstetter, “The Delicate Balance of Terror,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 37, no. 2 
(January 1959), pp. 211-34. 

13 . Quoted in Henry Kissinger, White House Years (Boston: Little, Brown, 1979), p. 136. 

14. Peter Grose, “U.S. Warns Soviet on Use of Force Against Czechs,” The New York Times, 
April 18, 1969. 

15. Peter Grose, “A Series of Limited Pacts on Missiles Now U.S. Aim,” The New York 
Times, April 22, 1969. 

16 . Chalmers M. Roberts, “U.S. to Propose Summer Talks on Arms Curb,” The Washington 
Post, May 13, 1969. 

17. “Clear It with Everett,” editorial, The New York Times, June 3, 1969. 

18 . “Start the Missile Talks,” editorial, The Washington Post, April 5, 1969- 

19 . See Kissinger, White House Years, pp. 265ff. 

20 . Quoted in ibid., p. 165. 

21 . Richard M. Nixon, “Asia After Viet Nam,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 46, no. 1 (October 1967), 
p. 121. 

22 . “Nixon’s View of the World — From Informal Talks,” in U.S. News & World Report, vol. 
LXV, no. 12 (September 16, 1968), p. 48. 

23. Rogers Address Before the National Press Club, Canberra, Australia, August 8, 1969, in 
U.S. Department of State Bulletin, vol. LXI, no. 1575 (September 1, 1969), pp. 179-80. 

24 . Richardson address, “The Foreign Policy of the Nixon Administration: Its Aims and 
Strategy,” in ibid., vol. LXI, no. 1578 (September 22, 1969), p. 260. 

25 . Second Annual Report, in Nixon Papers, 1971 vol., p. 277. 

26 . Ibid. 

27 . Quoted in Kissinger, White House Years, p. 1062. 

28 . Quoted in ibid. 

29 . Joint Communique Issued at Shanghai, February 27, 1972, in State Bulletin, vol. LXVI, 
no. 1708 (March 20, 1972), pp. 435-38. 

30. See Henry Kissinger, Years of Upheaval (Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), pp. 233, 294-95, 
1173-74. 


CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 

Detente and Its Discontents 

1. Willy Brandt, People and Politics: The Years 1960-1975, trans. byj. Maxwell Brownjohn 
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1976), pp. 123-24. 

2 . See Henry Kissinger, Years of Upheaval (Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), pp. 459ff 

3. “Detente: An Evaluation,” statement by Robert Conquest, Brian Crozier, John Erickson, 
Joseph Godson, Gregory Grossman, Leopold Labedz, Bernard Lewis, Richard Pipes, Leo- 
nard Schapiro, Edward Shils, and P. J. Vatikiotis, reprinted for use of the Subcommittee on 
Arms Control, Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate, 93rd Cong., 2nd sess. 
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, June 20, 1974), p. 1. 


869 



Notes 


4 . Statement of George Meany, President, American Federation of Labor and Congress of 
Industrial Organizations, to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, October 1, 1974, in 
United States Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, Detente: Hearings on United States 
Relations with Communist Countries , 93rd Cong., 2nd sess. (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 1973), pp. 379-80. 

5 . Henry Kissinger, “America’s Permanent Interests,” address before the Boston World 
Affairs Council, March 11, 1976, in U.S. Department of State Bulletin, vol. LXXIV, no. 1919 
(April 3, 1976), pp. 427-28. 

6. Quoted in Henry Kissinger, White House Years (Boston: Little, Brown, 1979), p. i486. 

7 . For details of the debate, see Kissinger, Years of Upheaval, pp. 256-74, 1006-28. 

8. See Coral Bell, The Diplomacy of Detente (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1977), pp. 201- 
222 . 

9 . “Improving U.S. -Soviet Relations,” editorial, The New York Times, February 22, 1971, 
p. 5- 

10 . “Trade and Freedom,” editorial, in ibid., September 18, 1973, p- 42. 

11 . “The Requirements of Detente,” editorial, Washington Post, September 12, 1973- 

12 . Kissinger, “America’s Permanent Interests,” pp. 431-32. 

13 . Quoted in Timothy Garton Ash, In Europe’s Name: Germany and the Divided Conti- 
nent (New York: Random House, 1993), p- 260. 

14 . Ibid., p. 223. 

15 . “European ‘Security’ . . . and Real Detente,” editorial, The New York Times, July 21, 
1975 p- 20. 

16 . Henry Kissinger, “American Unity and the National Interest,” address before the South- 
ern Commodity Producers Conference in Birmingham, Alabama, August 14, 1975, in State 
Bulletin, vol. LXXIII, no. 1890 (September 15, 1975), p. 392. 

17 . Kissinger, “America’s Permanent Interests,” p. 428. 

CHAPTER THIRTY 

The End of the Cold War: Reagan and Gorbachev 

1. Ronald Reagan, Remarks at the Annual Washington Conference of the American Legion, 
February 22, 1983, in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Ronald Reagan, 
1983 vol., bk. I (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1982-90), p. 270 
(hereinafter cited as Reagan Papers). 

2 . Ibid., p. 271. 

3 . Ronald Reagan, News Conference, January 29, 1981, in ibid., 1981 vol., p. 57. 

4 . Reagan Address to Members of the British Parliament, London, June 8, 1982, in ibid., 
1982 vol., bk. 1, p. 744. 

5 . “TRB” (Richard Strout), “Reagan’s Holy War,” The New Republic, April 11, 1983, p. 6. 

6. Anthony Lewis, “Onward, Christian Soldiers,” The New York Times, March 10, 1983, 
p. A27. 

7 . Stanley Hoffmann, “Foreign Policy: What’s to Be Done?,” New York Review of Books, 
April 30, 1981, pp. 33-37, 39- 

8. Text of Reagan letter in Remarks to Members of the National Press Club on Arms 
Reduction and Nuclear Weapons, November 18, 1981, in Reagan Papers, 1981 vol., p. 1065. 

9 . Ronald Reagan, An American Life (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990), p. 576. 

10 . Ibid., p. 592. 

11 . Ibid., p. 603. 

12 . Ibid., p. 634. 

13 . Lou Cannon, President Reagan. The Role of a Lifetime (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1990), p. 792. 

14 . Ronald Reagan, Address Before a Joint Session of Congress on the State of the Union, 
January 25, 1984, in Reagan Papers, 1984 vol., bk. I, p. 92. 

15 . Reagan, Address to British Parliament, June 8, 1982, in ibid., 1982 vol., bk. I, p. 746. 

16 . Ibid., p. 745. 

17 . See Peter W. Rodman’s forthcoming book on the Cold War in the Third World, to be 
published by Charles Scribner’s Sons. 


870 



Notes 


18 . Shultz Address, “America and the Struggle for Freedom,” February 22, 1985 (Washing- 
ton, D.C.: U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, February 1985), Current Policy 
no. 659, pp. 1-5. 

19 . Quoted in Leon V. Sigal, Nuclear Forces in Europe (Washington, D.C.: Brookings 
Institution, 1984), p. 86. 

20 . Mitterrand speech before the Bundestag on the occasion of the Twentieth Anniversary 
of the Franco-German Treaty of Cooperation, January 20, 1983 (France: Foreign Affairs 
Ministry, The Press and Information Service). 

21 . Reagan, Remarks to National Press Club, November 18, 1981, in Reagan Papers, 1981 
vol., p. 1065. 

22 . “Reagan Proposes U.S. Seek New Way to Block Missiles,” The New York Times, March 
24, 1983, p. A20. 

23 . Harold Brown, ed., The Strategic Defense Initiative: Shield or Snare ? (Boulder, Col., 
and London: Westview Press for the Johns Hopkins Foreign Policy Institute, 1987). 

24 . Harold Brown, “Introduction” and “Is SDI Technically Feasible?,” in ibid., pp. 4-7, 
131-32, 138. 

25 . Richard Betts, “Heavenly Gains or Earthly Losses? Toward a Balance Sheet for Strategic 
Defense,” in ibid., pp. 238-39. 

26. George Liska, “The Challenge of SDI: Preemptive Diplomacy or Preventive War?,” in 
ibid, p. 107. 

27 . Robert Osgood, “Implications for US-European Relations,” in ibid., pp. 266-68, 
276-78. 

28 . Quoted in Dan Smith, Pressure: How America Runs NATO (London: Bloomsburg, 
1989), p. 184. 

29 . Reagan, Address Before the Japanese Diet in Tokyo, November 11, 1983, in Reagan 
Papers, 1983 vol., bk. II, p. 1575. 

30 . Reagan, American Life, p. 550. 

31 . Cannon, President Reagan, p. 289. 

32 . Reagan, Remarks at a White House Briefing for Chief Executive Officers of Trade 
Associations and Corporations on Deployment of the MX Missile, May 16, 1983, in Reagan 
Papers, 1983 vol., bk. I, p. 715. 

33 . Reagan, Address to the Nation on Defense and National Security, March 23, 1983, in 
ibid., p. 443. 

34 . George P. Shultz, “Nuclear Weapons, Arms Control, and the Future of Deterrence,” 
address before the International House of Chicago and The Chicago Sun-Times Forum at 
the University of Chicago, November 17, 1986, in U.S. Department of State Bulletin, vol. 87, 
no. 2118 (January 1987), pp. 31-35. 

35 . Mikhail Gorbachev, Perestroika. New Thinking for Our Country and the World (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1987), p. 139. 

36 . Mikhail Gorbachev, press conference following Geneva Summit, November 21, 1985, 
in Geneva: The Soviet- US Summit, November 1985, Documents and Materials (Moscow: 
Novosti Press Agency Publishing House, 1985), p- 18. 

37 . Mikhail Gorbachev, address on the 70th anniversary of the Great October Socialist 
Revolution, November 2, 1987, in Foreign Broadcast Information Service (SOV-87-212, 
November 3, 1987), p. 55- 

38 . “An Interview with Gorbachev,” Time, September 9, 1985, p. 23. 

39 - “Gorbachev Pledges Major Troop Cutback Then Ends Trip, Citing Vast Soviet Quake,” 
The New York Times, December 8, 1988, p. Al. 

40. Ibid., p. A19- 

41 . Excerpts of Gorbachevs speech in Vladivostok, June 28, 1986, in The New York Times, 
June 29, 1986, p. A6. 

42 . Excerpts of Gorbachev’s speech to the Council of Europe in Strasbourg, France, July 
6, 1989, in The New York Times, July 7, 1989, p. A6. 

43 . “Gorbachev, in Finland, Disavows Any Right of Regional Intervention,” The New York 
Times, October 26, 1989, p. Al. 

44. “Gorbachev Lends Honecker a Hand,” The New York Times, October 7, 1989, p. 5. 

45 . “Gorbachev Urges Economic Accords,” The New York Times, July 16, 1989, p. 17. 


871 



Notes 


46 . Strobe Talbott, “Rethinking the Red Menace,” Time, January 1, 1990, p. 69- 

47 . Fred Halliday, From Kabul to Managua: Soviet- American Relations in the 1980s (New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1989), pp. 17, 108-9, 134-35. 

48 . Vyacheslav Dashichev, “East-West: Quest for New Relations: On the Priorities of the 
Soviet State’s Foreign Policy,” in Foreign Broadcast Information Service (SOV-88-098, May 
20, 1988), pp. 4-8. 

49 . Ibid. 

50 . Eduard Shevardnadze, “The 19th All-Union CPSU Conference: Foreign Policy and 
Diplomacy,” International Affairs (Moscow), October 1988. 

51 . “X” (George F. Kennan), “The Sources of Soviet Conduct,” Foreign Affairs, vol. 25, no. 
4 (July 1947), p. 580. 


CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE 

The New World Order Reconsidered 

1. President George Bush, “The U.N.: World Parliament of Peace,” address to the U.N. 
General Assembly, New York, October 1, 1990, in Dispatch (U.S. Department of State), vol. 

1. no. 6 (October 8, 1990), p. 152. 

2 . President Bill Clinton, “Confronting the Challenges of a Broader World,” address to the 
U.N. General Assembly, New York, September 27, 1993, in ibid., vol. 4, no. 39 (September 
27, 1993), p. 650. 

3. Sir Halford John Mackinder, Democratic Ideals and Reality (Westport, Conn.: Green- 
wood Press, 1962). 

4 . Alexander Solzhenitsyn, “How Are We to Restructure Russia? A Modest Contribution,” 
Literatumaya Gazeta, Moscow, September 18, 1990, in Foreign Broadcast Information 
Service (SOV- 90-187, September 26, 1990), esp. pp. 37-41. 

5 . Remarks by President Bill Clinton to the Multinational Audience of Future Leaders of 
Europe, Hotel De Ville, Brussels, Belgium, January 9, 1994 (Brussels, Belgium: The White 
House, Office of the Press Secretary, press release, January 9, 1994), p. 5. 



Acknowledgments 

No one made a greater contribution than Gina Goldhammer, who edited 
the entire manuscript through its every draft. She was the focal point of 
all our efforts, and saw to it with extraordinary ability, infinite tact, and 
patience that everything merged at the proper moment. 

Jon Vanden Heuvel’s historical research was indispensable; in addition, 
he made innumerable helpful comments on the entire book as it took 
shape. 

My old friend and associate Peter Rodman did much research, espe- 
cially on the American material, and read each chapter. I am grateful to 
him for his helpful and insightful suggestions. 

Rosemary Neaher Niehuss has been a longtime, indefatigable aide. She 
did research, especially on Korea and Vietnam, checked everyone else’s 
research, tracked down elusive facts, and allowed nothing to escape her 
scrutiny. Valuable assistance came from Maureen Minehan and Stephanie 
Tone. 

Jody Iobst Williams typed the manuscript from my nearly illegible 
handwriting and straightened out many a turgid sentence structure. Su- 
zanne McFarlane freed me to concentrate on this book by keeping track 
of all my other activities with her customary tact and care. 

I benefited greatly from William G. Hyland’s suggestions on the Soviet 
material and from Norman Podhoretz’s reading of an early draft. 

Michael Korda at Simon & Schuster proved a marvelous editor and 
became a'good friend. He bore with me as the original, fairly simple idea 
changed its focus and grew into a much more complicated and prolonged 
undertaking. The measure of his contribution is that whenever one of his 
urbane comments particularly galled me, I found on reflection that he 
was right. 

Lynn Amato coordinated all Simon & Schuster activities with unfailing 
good humor and efficiency. All Simon & Schuster personnel — the copy 
editors, designers, production and promotion personnel — worked with 
touching dedication and consummate ability. 

My wife, Nancy, was, as always, a sound counselor and indispensable 
moral support. She read the entire manuscript and made extraordinarily 
wise suggestions. 

The shortcomings of the book are my own. 

Henry A. Kissinger 


873 



Picture Credits 


Page 6 Drawing by A. Forestier for the London Illustrated News. Bib- 

liotheque Nationale/Jean Loup Charmet. 

Page 10 Farewell Address.- Courtesy Historical Documents Co., Phila- 
delphia, Pennsylvania. Washington inset: Culver Pictures. 

Page 17 U.N. Photo. 

Page 29 Both: The Bettmann Archive. 

Page 56 Left: Hulton Deutsch Collection Limited. Right: Ullstein Bilder- 
dienst. 

Page 78 Hulton Deutsch Collection Limited. 

Page 103 Left: Hulton Deutsch Collection Limited. Right: © ND-VIOLLET. 
Page 137 Bettmann/Hulton. 

Page 168 The Bettmann Archive. 

Page 201 UPI/Bettmann. 

Page 218 Brown Brothers. 

Page 246 UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos. 

Page 266 © HARLINGUE-VIOLLET. 

Page 288 UPI/Bettmann. 

Page 332 UPI/Bettmann. 

Page 350 Archive Photos. 

Page 369 UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos. 

Page 394 The Bettmann Archive. 

Page 423 Both: UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos. 

Page 446 © Erich Lessing/MAGNUM Photos. 

Page 473 ACME. 

Page 493 © Bob Henriques/MAGNUM Photos. 

Page 522 © Erich Lessing/MAGNUM Photos. 

Page 550 © Erich Lessing/MAGNUM Photos. 

Page 568 Archive Photos. 

Page 594 Left.- Agence France-Presse/Archive Photos. Right: Deutsche 
Presse-Agentur/Archive Photos. 

Page 620 Ullstein Bilderdienst. 

Page 643 UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos. 

Page 674 Archive Photos France. 

Page 703 J. P. Laffont/SYGMA. 


875 



Picture Credits 


Page 733 AP/Wide World Photos. 

Page 762 Michel Philippot/SYGMA 

Page 804 United States: © Gallant/The Image Bank. Great Britain: Paul 
Trummer/The Image Bank. France: Romilly Lockyer/The 
Image Bank. Germany: © Patrick Doherty/Stockphotos. China: 
Marcel Isy-Schwart/The Image Bank. Russia: Benn Mitchell/The 
Image Bank .Japan: Hank de Lespinasse/The Image Bank. 


876 



Index 


ABC-1 Agreement, 389, 403-4 
Abernon, Lord d’, 232, 267-68 
ABM Treaty, 747-49, 780 
Abyssinia, 53, 249, 298-300, 302 
Access Authority, 590-91, 592 
Acheson, Dean, 538, 584 
on collective security, 459-60, 490 
containment policy and, 451-52, 459, 
618,623, 709, 713,741,755 
Pacific defense policy and, 475-76, 486- 
487, 490, 626 

U.S.-Soviet relations and, 501-2, 509, 553, 
755 

Adams, John Quincy, 34-35, 462, 621, 756, 
774, 833 

Adams, Sherman, 631 
Adenauer, Konrad, 283, 371, 498, 502-3, 
507, 514, 535, 587, 588-92, 604, 60 6, 
607, 735 

Access Authority and, 590-91, 592 
Berlin crisis and, 571-73, 575, 577, 578, 
579, 584, 589 

Franco-German mutual friendship treaty 
and, 547, 615-17 

nuclear weapons and, 589-90, 599-600 
Sino-Soviet rift as seen by, 588-89, 720 
Stalin’s Peace Note rejected by, 502, 504 
Adrianople, Treaty of, 173 
Afghanistan, 152, 161, 178, 192, 249, 449, 
593, 775, 788-89, 824 
Soviet invasion of, 141, 701, 763, 774, 787, 
792 

Aix-la-Chapelle, Congress of, 89, 90 
Albania, 199, 443 

Alexander I, Tsar of Russia, 54, 85, 86, 87, 
140, 142, 156, 398, 432 
Congress of Vienna and, 79, 83 
Pitt and, 7^-76 

Alexander II, Tsar of Russia, 163, 4 14, 432 
Alexander III, Tsar of Russia, 163-64, 175, 
204, 206-8 

Algeciras Conference (1906), 190, 191, 196, 
197 

Algeria, 531, 603, 614, 625, 674 
Allgemeine Zeitung, 185 
Alliance for Progress, 831 
Alsace-Lorraine, 134, 138, 159, 160, 180, 194, 
204, 219, 225, 239, 269, 351 
America First Committee, 389 


American Legion, 767 

American Society of Newspaper Editors, 

509 

Andropov, Yuri, 770, 776, 111 
Anglo-American relationship: 
colonialism and, 401-2 
France and, 376-77, 596-97, 611, 612, 
614 

isolationism and, 96-97, 101, 385 
nuclear weapons in, 601-2 
overestimation of Britain’s capability in, 
449-50 

“special” nature of, 43, 353-55, 384-87, 
548, 596-98, 601, 611, 612, 632-33 
World War II prelude and, 370, 386, 387, 
391-92 

Anglo-French Entente (1907), 192 
Anglo-French Naval Treaty, 197-98, 212-13 
Anglo-French relationship: 

annexation of Savoy and Nice in, 1 10, 1 12 
Belgium and, 71, 97, 99, 115, 118, 222, 
251-52 

Common Market issues in, 615, 616 
Egypt and, 145, 159, 162, 171, 178, 233- 
234 

League of Nations and, 253-55 
Naval Treaty in, 197-98, 212-13 
post-Versailles rift in, 246, 250-55, 258, 
265 

Suez crisis in, see Suez crisis 
Triple Entente and, 192 
U.S. and, 376-77, 596-97, 611, 612, 614 
Weimar Germany and, 250-55 
Anglo-French-Russian Entente (1907), 191- 
192 

Anglo-Japanese Alliance, 373 
Angola, 593, 698, 701, 713, 751, 757, 763, 
773, 774, 787 

Anschluss, 249, 283, 297, 310-11, 381 
Anti-Comintern Pact, 359, 363 
appeasement policy, 114, 309, 310, 311- 
312 

Britain and, 306-7, 310, 311-12, 340 
France and, 306-7 
Suez crisis and, 531 
Arab-Israeli conflict, 523, 527-28 
Arab-Israeli War of 1973 (Yom Kippur War), 
537, 593, 614, 713, 738, 739, 743-44, 
766 


877 



Index 


Arab League, 523 
Arab Legion, 523, 529 
Arab nationalism, 523, 524, 530, 539 
U.S. and, 532-33 
Argentina, 38, 831 
Armand, Count, 115 
Armenia, 154, 792 

arms control, 518, 714, 752, 784, 790 
complexity of, 715-16, 748, 752 
containment policy and, 715-16 
missile deployment issue and, 776-77 
SDI and, 782 

surprise attack and, 714-16 
see also ABM Treaty; nuclear weapons; 
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks 
arms race, 493, 515, 716 
economic pressures and, 790 
Reagan’s military buildup and, 775 
SDI and, 775, 778, 782, 790-91 
Aron, Raymond, 595 
Asad, Hafez, 739 

ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations), 827-28 

Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), 
828 

Associated States of the French Union, 625, 
631 

Aswan Dam project, 527-30, 538, 539 
Atlantic Alliance, see North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization 

Atlantic Charter, 390, 401, 454 
Anglo-Soviet exchanges and, 406-7 
Pitt Plan compared with, 391 
Atlantic Community, 819 
atomic bomb, 409 
Potsdam Conference and, 435-37 
Soviet propaganda and, 441-42 
U.S. military doctrine and, 441-42 
U.S. monopoly on, 435-36, 437, 439, 441, 
466, 487, 573-74, 607-8, 763 
see also nuclear weapons 
Attlee, Clement, 435 
Aubrac, Raymond, 663-64 
Austin, Warren, 458 
Australia, 315, 480, 631, 632, 637 
Austria, 72, 74, 104, 109, 121, 128, 179, 203, 
300, 301, 307, 308, 338, 590, 820 
Balkans and, 91-94, 194, 222 
Bismarck’s policy and, 122-24, 129, 130, 
131-33, 155-57, 162 

Bosnia-Herzegovina annexed by, 195-96, 
209, 214 

Britain and, 99-100 

in conflict over Schleswig-Holstein, 112— 
114 

Congress of Vienna and, 79, 81 


domination of Central Europe and, 57, 
59, 60, 80, 112 

France and Piedmont’s war against, 103, 

110 - 11, 130 

Franco-Russian Agreement and, 181 
Germany and, 123, 158-59, 249, 283, 297, 
310-11,381 

in Holy Alliance, 35, 82, 83, 119, 130, 131 
Mediterranean Agreement and, 159 
Metternich system and, 85-88 
Morocco crisis and, 197 
Napoleon III and, 106, 118 
in Pitt Plan, 76 

Prussia’s conflicts with, 69, 80, 85, 100, 
107, 113-17, 129, 156 
in Quadruple Alliance, 82 
Reinsurance Treaty and, 164, 180-81 
Revolution of 1848 and, 99 
Russia’s Balkan conflict with, 138-39, 

144, 146-47, 159-60 
Russia’s rivalry with, 86, 87, 93-94, 99, 
146-47, 153, 173, 199 
Serbian ultimatum of, 211, 214 
in Three Emperors’ League, 155-59 
Triple Alliance and, 186 
Triple Entente and, 200 
Wars of Succession, 69 
World War I outbreak and, 211-12, 214- 
215 

Austrian State Treaty, 498, 509, 514 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, 138, 145, 146, 
164, 178, 201, 203, 210, 310, 814 
demise of, 217, 221, 242-43 
Reinsurance Treaty and, 164 
successor states to, 240, 241 
Treaty of San Stefano rejected by, 153 
Austro-Prussian War, 103, 107, 109, 114-19 
Azerbaijan, 446, 495 

Baghdad Pact, 527, 529, 548, 549 
Bahr, Egon, 736 
Baker, James, 740 

balance-of-power policy, 17-21, 29-30, 59, 
67-68, 99, 165-67, 221, 266, 398 
Bismarck’s model of, 135-36, 165-67, 
171-72 

Britain and, 17, 70-73, 90, 98, 145, 220, 
266, 823, 826 

Congress of Vienna and, 79 
Enlightenment roots of, 21-22 
France and, 68, 70 

legitimacy principle and, 82-83, 167 
Metternich system and, 166, 397 
NATO and, 458, 460 

in new world order, 20-22, 76-77, 810, 
813, 823, 827 


878 



Index 


Nixon on, 705 

Palmerston/Disraeli approach to, 161, 
162, 165-67 

policy in Cold War vs., 22, 141, 182, 608 
Reagan and, 771 
Truman’s rejection of, 446-47 
Wilson’s condemnation of, 226 
see also Realpolitik 

Baldwin, Stanley, 291-92, 293, 295-96, 299, 
308, 597 

Balfour, Arthur James, Lord, 243, 262 
Balkan League, 199 

Balkans, 112, 122, 154, 162, 163, 363, 621 
Austria and, 91-94, 194, 222 
Austro-Russian rivalry and, 85, 138-39, 
144, 146, 158, 159-60, 179-80, 199- 
200 

in Churchill’s World War II plans, 403, 
404 

Crimean War and, 93 
crisis of 1876 in, 148-49 
Ottomans in, 152-53 
see also “Eastern Question’’ 

Balkan War (1875-78), 173 
Balkan War (1885), 173 
Balkan War (1912), 199 
Ball, George, 612, 657 
Baltic states, 347, 352, 355, 798 
Bao Dai, 626 
Bark, Peter, 214 
Basket III, see Helsinki Accords 
Bavaria, 69, 81, 117, 268 
Bay of Pigs invasion, 583, 646, 647-48 
Beard, Charles, 380 
Belgian Congo, 220, 807 
Belgium, 118, 255, 340 
Anglo-French rivalry and, 71, 97, 99, 115, 
118, 222,251-52 
in Fourteen Points, 225 
German invasions of, 42, 48, 99, 351, 
352-53 

Maginot Line and, 303 
Versailles settlement and, 239, 274, 301 
World War I and, 205, 206, 213 
Belorussia, 259, 419 
Ben-Gurion, David, 542, 543 
Beria, Lavrenti, 499, 504-5, 519, 555 
Berlin, Congress of, 155-58, 173, 177, 195, 
196, 202-3 

Berlin, Isaiah, 370, 371 
Berlin Agreement (1971), 736-37 
Berlin blockade (1948), 190, 469, 473-74, 
476, 495, 498, 500, 569, 584, 624 
Berlin crisis (1958-63), 568-93, 594, 617, 
650 

Access Authority and, 590-91, 592 


Berlin Wall and, 583-84, 591, 592, 593 
Camp David Summit and, 580-82 
Cuban missile crisis and, 586, 591, 593 
Four-Power Agreement and, 570-71 
Geneva Summit and, 520 
German unification and, 571-73, 577-78, 
587 

Khrushchev’s ultimatum and, 570-72, 
575, 595 

Macmillan and, 573, 575, 577, 578-79, 
598-600 

nuclear threat and, 573-74, 585, 586 
post -World War II settlement and, 583- 
584 

Sputnik and, 570 
U-2 affair and, 582 
U.S.-German relations in, 587-89 
Berlin Memorandum, 149, 152 
Berlin uprising (1953), 555 
Berlin Wall, 229, 583-84, 591, 592, 593, 734, 
794-95 

Bessarabia, 108, 156, 26l, 336, 347, 355, 419 
Bethmann-Hollweg, Theobald von, 184, 

208, 209, 213 
Betts, Richard, 779 
Bevin, Ernest, 435 
Biddle, Francis, 388 

Bismarck, Otto von, 94, 100, 103-36, 150, 
180,217, 222,310, 502, 531,621 
Alexander III and, 163 
alliance system of, 147, 158-59 
Austro-German Treaty and, 158-59 
Austro-Prussian War and, 115-18 
background and personality of, 104 
balance-of-power policy of, 135-36, 165— 
167, 171-72 

Berlin Memorandum and, 149 
“blood and iron” remark of, 662 
Budapest proposal of, 138 
Bulgarian crisis and, 163-64 
in conflict over Schleswig-Holstein, 113- 
114 

Congress of Berlin and, 154, 155-56 
Crimean War and diplomacy of, 131-32 
Disraeli contrasted with, 155 
domestic policy and, 120-24, 135, 150 
France-Piedmont-Austria War (1859) and, 
126 

Franco-Prussian War and, 118 
on Franco-Russian alliance, 132 
Gerlach and, 124-27, 146 
German Confederation and, 117, 129 
German unification and, 65-66, 105, 119, 
121, 133-34, 145-46, 229, 239 
Gladstone and, 162 
Goltz and, 114-16 


879 



Index 


Bismarck, Otto von ( cont .) 

Holy Alliance and diplomacy of, 121, 122, 
124, 125 

legacy of, 105, 120-21, 136 
“Master Dispatch” of, 131-33, 134 
Mediterranean Agreement and, 159 
Metternich system and, 121-31, 1 46 
Napoleon III and, 105, 123-24 
nonalignment strategy of, 122-24, 128 
Prussia’s primacy and, 128-30 
Realpolitik and, 121, 125-28, 130, 133, 
146, 165,211 

Reinsurance Treaty and, 164 
successors to, 165, 170, 171-72, 175, 183, 
204, 205 

Three Emperors’ League (first) and, 146— 
147, 148, 153 

Three Emperors’ League (second) and, 
158, 163-64 
Triple Alliance and, 159 
William II and, 170-71, 209 
Blum, Leon, 307 
Bohlen, Charles, 562 

Bolsheviks, Bolshevism, 221, 258, 259, 271, 
333-34, 552, 773 

Bosnia-Herzegovina, 53, 149, 154, 156, 195, 
216, 809, 820 

Austria’s annexation of, 195-96, 209, 214 
1908 crisis in, 195, 199, 214 
Bourgeois, Leon, 236-37 
Bowles, Chester, 389, 651 
Bowman, Isaiah, 234 
Bradford, Lady, 149 
Bradley, Omar N., 474-75, 486, 487 
Brandt, Willy, 578, 584, 758 
Ostpolitik of, 734-37 
Brazil, 38, 831 

Brest-Litovsk, Treaty of, 220, 227, 241, 257, 
258-60 

Bretton Woods Conference (1944), 405 
Brezhnev, Leonid, 713, 730, 731, 756, 758, 
769-70, 774, 776, 797 

Brezhnev Doctrine, 722, 727, 773, 787, 788- 
789 

Gorbachev’s retreat from, 793-94 
U.S. opening to China and, 722, 727 
Briand, Aristide, 228, 253, 274, 27 6, 277-82, 
334 

British Cabinet, 89, 214, 255, 308, 538 
Abyssinia crisis and, 299 
Anglo-German naval accord and, 297-98 
Anglo-Soviet diplomacy and, 347-48 
Czechoslovakia crisis and, 311-12 
disarmament issue and, 293 
Nazi threat and, 340, 341, 342 
British Parliament, 72-73, 342 


British Somalia, 299 
British War Cabinet, 270, 401-2 
Brockdorff-Rantzau, Ulrich von, 282 
Brogan, D. W., 281 
Brown, Harold, 779 
Bruce, David, 465, 578 
Brussels, Pact of, 457 
Buchanan, Andrew, 151-52 
Buddhists, 654-55 
Bukharin, Nikolai, 259 
Bukovina, 355 

Bulganin, Nikolai, 516, 542-43, 553 
Bulgaria, 37, 148, 153, 154, 156, 160, 161, 
176, 195, 214, 219, 362, 363, 366, 409, 
413, 434 

crisis of 1885 in, 163-64, 173 
in Soviet orbit, 435, 437, 443, 446, 448, 
451 

Bullitt, William C., 381 

Bulow, Prince von, 172, 186-87 

Bundy, McGeorge, 587, 671 

Bundy, William, 651, 653, 663 

Bunker, Ellsworth, 465 

Buol-Schauenstein, Karl Ferdinand von, 93 

Burma, 624, 632, 637 

Bush, George, 46, 53, 177-78, 659, 764, 785, 
806, 817, 832 

new world order proclaimed by, 804-5 
Bush Administration, 773, 817 
Byrnes, James, 424, 437, 438 

Cambodia, 625, 692, 696, 763, 792 
communist bases in, 647, 680, 681, 693- 
694 

Khmer Rouge in, 694, 697 
neutrality of, 645-46, 686, 693-94 
Vietnamese invasion of, 637, 773 
Cambon, Paul, 191 
Camp David Summit, 600 
Berlin crisis and, 580-82 
Canada, 31, 37, 178, 315, 383, 832 
Canning, George, 35, 95, 101, 145, 148, 162, 
249 

Capet dynasty, 65 
Caprivi, Georg Leo von, 179 
Caprivi Strip, 180 
Carter, Jimmy, 739, 768, 770, 772 
Carter Administration, 767, 775 
Carteret, John, 73-74, 99 
Casablanca Conference (1943), 405 
Castlereagh, Robert Stewart, Lord, 87, 91, 
95, 399 

Congress of Vienna and, 79, 81-82, 155, 
161 

Congress system and, 74, 88-90 
Holy Alliance and, 83, 149 


880 



Index 


Castro, Fidel, 583, 698 
Catherine II (the Great), Empress of Russia, 
140, 338, 350 

Catholic Church, 56, 57-58, 59, 60, 64, 123 
Cavour, Count Camillo Benso di, 94, 110- 
111, 121-22, 531 

Cecil, Edgar Algernon Robert Gascoyne-, 
Lord, 236-37, 248 
Central America, 38, 774, 831-32 
Chamberlain, Austen, 270, 274, 27 6, 281, 
334 

Locarno Pact and, 273-74 
Chamberlain, Joseph, 185-86, 276-77 
Chamberlain, Neville, 308, 344, 358, 382, 
596 

Locarno Pact and, 277 
Munich Agreement and, see Munich 
Conference 

Soviets distrusted by, 341-42 
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, 57, 116 
Chautemps, Camille, 297 
Chernenko, Konstantin, 770 
Chiang Kai-shek, 529 
Chicherin, Georgi, 260, 263, 264 
Chile, 38, 773, 831 

China, Imperial, 25, 27, 145, 174, 178, 187 
China, Peoples Republic of: 
anti-interventionist policy of, 644-45, 661 
communist victory in, 620-27, 719 
Cultural Revolution of, 719, 730 
domestic unrest in, 250, 792-93, 830 
Egypt and, 529 

Four Policemen concept and, 395, 421 
growth of, 826, 829 
in Indian foreign policy, 564, 632 
Indochina conflict and, 630, 632, 634, 
635, 644—45, 660-61, 681 
Japan and, 25-26, 249, 286-87, 298, 377, 
379, 380, 385, 826-30 
Kissinger’s trip to, 726, 730-31 
Korean intervention and, 475-85, 488, 
625,661,719 

in new world order, 23-24, 25, 26, 807- 
808, 826-31 

Reykjavik Summit and, 783 

Soviet relations with, 509, 571, 627, 787; 

see also Sino-Soviet rift 
Tiananmen Square demonstrations in, 
792-93, 830 

China, Republic of, see Taiwan 
China, U.S. opening to, 713-32 
Brezhnev Doctrine and, 722, 727 
Chinese diplomacy and, 725-27 
domestic debate and, 479, 720-21, 741 
Kissinger’s trip and, 72 6, 730-31 
Mao and, 725-30 


Nixon and, 713-32 
Richardson’s speech and, 723-24 
role of personality in, 727, 729 
Shanghai Communique and, 727-29 
Sino-Soviet rift and, 713-14, 719-25, 728, 
730-31 

Warsaw talks and, 72 6 
Zhou and, 719, 727, 729 
China lobby, 479, 74l 
Christian Democratic Party, German, 503 
Churchill, Winston, 72, 74, 75, 255, 305, 371, 
379, 389, 394-422, 427, 499, 503, 505, 
515, 530, 583, 595, 634, 704-5, 713, 784 
Allied occupation of Berlin favored by, 
417 

Atlantic Charter and, 390-91, 401 
Balkans operation proposed by, 403, 404 
colonial issue and, 409, 410 
on containment policy, 461, 463-64, 
466-67 

Davies’ view of, 430-31 
on destroyers-for-bases deal, 388 
detente and, 512-13, 514 
East- West negotiations urged by, 498, 
506-12 

Eisenhower’s correspondence with, 512, 
514, 632-33 

FDR’s wartime correspondence with, 
395-96, 421 

Four-Power Summit idea of, 508-11, 516 
German rearmament opposed by, 295- 
296 

Indochina conflict as perceived by, 632- 
633 

Iron Cumin speech of, 441, 442-43, 466, 
504 

on Middle East policy, 524 
postwar Polish government and, 418 
post-World War II order and, 395, 399- 
400, 406-7, 422, 428-30 
at Potsdam Conference, 433-34, 435, 436 
spheres-of-influence arrangement of, 
413-14 

at Teheran Conference, 410, 411, 412 
unconditional surrender policy of, 405 
U.S.-British “special relationship” and, 
353-55, 387, 632-33 
wartime diplomacy and strategy of, 394- 
422 

William II described by, 171 
at Yalta Conference, 396, 410, 414-15 
Clarendon, George William Frederick 
Villiers, Lord, 100, 108 
Clark Amendment, 773 
Clay, Lucius, 584, 592 
Clemenceau, Georges, 230-32 


881 



Index 


Clifford, Clark, 450-51, 677 
Clinton, Bill, 682, 740, 806, 817, 832 
“enlarging democracy” theme of, 805 
Pacific Community proposal of, 826, 828 
Partnership for Peace concept of, 824-25 
Cobb, Irvin S., 389 
Cobden, Richard, 100 
coexistence, see detente policy; peaceful 
coexistence 

Cold War, 23, 53-54, 165, 173, 226, 298, 
330-31 (map), 422, 461, 491, 514, 645, 
741,801-2 

Arab nationalism and, 532 
balance-of-power system and, 22, 141, 
182, 608 

beginning of, 423-45 
Berlin crisis and, 593 
Bush influenced by, 177 
cultural gap and, 438 
early Anglo-U.S. -Soviet relations and, 427, 
430 

Eastern Europe and, 431-32, 434-35, 
438, 550-51, 564, 566 
Geneva Summit and, 516-19 
Great Debate on, 799-800 
Hungarian uprising and, 550-51, 564, 

566 

Japanese foreign policy in, 26 
linkage debate and, 717 
missile deployment issue and, 775-77 
as moral crusade, 54, 462-63, 471, 709 
Nonaligned nations and, 546, 564 
NSC-68 and, 462-63 
nuclear testing during, 715 
Potsdam Conference and, 433-36 
pre-World War I era and, 168, 198-99 
second front strategy and, 404-5 
Soviet weakness and, 438-39 
spheres of influence in, 328-29 (map) 
Suez crisis and, 523, 525 
U.N. and, 249-50 

see also containment policy; detente 
policy; Peace Note 

collective security, 51-53, 74, 91, 160, 221- 
223, 246-50, 292, 335, 372, 37 6, 408, 
421,426-27 

Abyssinian crisis and, 298, 300 
Acheson on idea of, 459-60, 490 
aggression and, 249, 253-54, 255 
alliances concept and, 247-48 
Britain and, 88, 97, 266-67 
Geneva Protocol and, 254-55 
Gulf War and, 250 
League of Nations and, 30, 53, 222 
NATO and, 460 

Paris Peace Conference and, 235, 236 


Russo-German neutrality treaty and, 282 
Soviet foreign policy and, 336, 338-39, 
340 

Suez crisis and, 525 
Treaty of Versailles and, 221, 222, 227, 
232, 235, 253-34 
U.N. and, 249-50 

weakness of, 53, 90-91, 235, 246-50, 340 
Colombia, 39 

colonialism, 401-2, 408-10, 524-26, 545- 
546 

Colville, John, 506, 509 
Cominform (Communist Information 
Bureau), 443, 552 

Comintern (Communist International), 143, 
335, 412, 443 

Common European Home concept, 791 
Common Market, 24, 120, 596, 606-8, 615- 
616, 806, 820-24 
communism: 

collapse of, 18-19, 54, 520-21, 618, 704, 
752, 763, 773-75, 784, 800, 814-18; see 
also new world order 
in convergence theory, 711 
post-World War II expansion of, 476, 
496-97, 519, 551-52, 566-67 
see also Cold War; containment policy; 
detente policy; specific countries and 
parties 

Communist Manifesto, 773 
Communist Party, Bulgarian, 570 
Communist Party, Chinese, 725 
Communist Party, Hungarian, 555, 556 
Communist Party, North Vietnamese, 656, 
698 

Communist Party, Polish, 418, 554 
Communist Party, Soviet, 441, 520, 793 
Central Committee of, 338-39 
Comintern disbanded by, 412 
Gorbachev’s purge of, 785, 786, 787 
in Kennan’s “X” article, 454-55 
liberalization and, 794, 795, 796, 797 
Politburo of, 358, 499 
Soviet victory and, 440 
in U.S. foreign policy, 453-55 
Communist Party congresses, Soviet: 
Seventeenth, 335 
Eighteenth, 338, 340, 343 
Nineteenth, 499 
Twentieth, 553, 555, 569 
Twenty-first, 571 
Twenty -seventh, 787, 801 
Conference for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe (CSCE), 733, 740, 757-60, 793, 
818, 825 

Confucianism, 638, 699, 730 


882 



Index 


Congress, U.S., 39, 230, 236, 370, 371, 501, 
589, 627, 672, 716, 726, 747, 754 
ABM Treaty and, 747-48 
containment policy and, 474 
destroyers-for-bases deal and, 388 
detente conflict in, 744-45 
FDR’s Four Policemen report to, 4 16 
foreign policy and, 741 
Four-Power Treaty and, 373-74, 375 
Fourteen Points and, 225 
Greek-Turkish aid program and, 451 
Neutrality Acts of, 378, 379, 385-86, 409 
Nixon and, 745-51 

peacetime conscription passed by, 388 
SALT and, 749-51 

Vietnam extrication and, 681, 685, 689, 
690, 692, 696-97, 699 
Congress system, 82, 88-91 
Connally, Senator Tom, 412-13, 458, 459 
Conservative Party, British, 277, 291; see 
also Tory Party, British 
Constantinople Convention (1888), 536 
Constitution, U.S., 21-22, 525 
containment policy, 47, 424, 445, 446-72, 
565, 566, 625, 650, 707, 713, 743, 813 
ambiguities of, 455-56, 471-74, 514-15 
arms control and, 715-16 
Britain and, 449-50, 467-68 
Churchill’s criticism of, 463-64, 466-67 
Clifford and, 450-51 
conservative critique of, 470-71 
convergence theory and, 71 1 
Czech coup and, 457 
Dulles and, 470, 514-15, 709 
European recovery and, 453-61 
Greek-Turkish aid issue and, 451-52, 
469, 473, 474 

Kennan’s Long Telegram and, 443, 447- 
449, 454 

Kennan’s reinterpretation of, 471 
Kennan’s “X” article and, 454-5 6 
Korean War and, 479, 487, 489-90 
Lippmann on, 463-66, 467, 665-66 
moral values and, 461-62 
New Deal and, 456-57 
post-World War II success of, 473-74 
“psychiatric school” and, 709-11 
Soviet unilateral force reductions and, 
792 

spheres of influence and, 447, 456 
success of, 593, 801-2 
Suez crisis and, 525-26, 527, 537, 545 
Truman Doctrine and, 452-53 
Wallace on, 464, 467-70, 710, 824 
Coolidge, Calvin, 374 
cordon sanitaire, 243 


Council of Europe, 791, 794 
Council on Foreign Relations, 375 
Counter-Reformation, 59, 60, 66 
Couve de Murville, Maurice, 530 
Cowley, Henry, 110 
Craftsman, 12 

Crimean War, 79, 92-94, 100, 102-3, 105, 
108-9, 111, 119, 131-32, 166, 173, 250 
Crippled Giant, The (Fulbright), 689 
Cripps, Stafford, 295, 359 
Croatia, 240 
Cronkite, Walter, 671 
Crowe, Eyre, 192-93, 268, 353 
Crowe Memorandum, 192-93, 268, 353 
Cuba, 37, 39, 520, 713, 745, 757, 763, 764, 
773, 832 

Cuban missile crisis, 249, 520, 543, 548, 586, 
591, 593, 595, 722 
Cultural Revolution, 719, 730 
Curzon, George Nathaniel, Lord, 261, 268, 
27 6 

Curzon Line, 261, 265, 341, 351, 406 
Czechoslovakia, 590, 596, 599, 722, 793 
communist coup in, 457, 469, 495, 498, 
625 

France and, 120, 275, 276, 296, 303, 308- 
309,311,313,314-15,317 
German occupation of, 316-17, 318, 337, 
339, 340, 364 

German population of, 240, 244, 309, 31 1 
Hitler-Chamberlain meetings and, 312- 
313 

Munich settlement and, 314-16 
Soviet-Egyptian arms sale and, 523, 548 
Soviet intervention in, 249, 443, 476, 551, 
624, 704, 716, 734 
Soviet pact with, 336, 337 
Czech Republic, 817, 823, 824 

Daladier, Edouard, 293, 313, 386 
Danzig, 307, 317, 365 
Darwin, Charles, 40, 127 
Dashichev, Vyacheslav, 800-801 
Davies, Joseph E., 430-41 
Dawes, Charles G., 272 
Dawes Plan, 278, 282-83 
Declaration of Interdependence (1962), 

613 

Decree on Peace (1917), 259 
Defense Department, U.S., 658, 680, 748, 
749 

de Gaulle, Charles, 120, 371, 503, 530, 572, 
595, 598, 601-19, 625, 666, 705, 777 
Anglo-American relationship opposed by, 
614-15 

detente and, 734, 735 


883 



Index 


de Gaulle, Charles ( corn .) 
diplomatic style of, 603-5, 611 
Directorate concept of, 610-11, 617 
Eisenhower and, 606 
Frances self-esteem and, 602-3 
Franco-American conflict and, 603-6 
Franco-German cooperation and, 547, 
615-18 

on integrated forces concept, 614-15 
JFK’s partnership policy rejected by, 6 16- 
617 

on Khrushchev’s ultimatum, 575-76, 582 
Kissinger’s encounters with, 604-5 
Nassau Agreement rejected by, 615 
NATO’s structure and, 610-12 
nuclear strategy and, 610 
raison d'etat and, 576-77 
Sino-Soviet rift as seen by, 720 
unified Europe concept of, 606-8, 615— 
616 

withdrawal from Algeria and, 674 
Delbos, Yvon, 307, 308-9 
Delcass6, Th£ophile, 190 
democracy, 18, 30, 57, 135, 166, 221-22, 382 
Confucianism contrasted with, 638 
independence movements and, 525 
post-World War II expansion of, 620-23, 
773 

in Russia, 816 

in South Vietnam, 637, 639, 653-56 
Truman Doctrine and, 453 
Western-style, 525, 811-12 
World War I and, 219 
Democratic National Convention (1968), 
678, 679 

Democratic Party, U.S., 370-71, 678, 679, 
743-44 

Deng Xiaoping, 727 

Denmark, 59, 112-14, 175, 389-90, 407 
Denmark-Prussia-Austria War (Danish War), 
103, 112-14, 119 

Derby, Edward Henry Smith Stanley, Lord, 
147 

destroyers-for-bases deal, 387-88 
detente policy, 123, 733-61 
ABM Treaty and, 747-49 
Arab-Israeli War of 1973 and, 739 
Churchill and, 512-13, 514 
Congressional approval and, 744-45, 747 
critics of, 743-46, 747, 754-57, 761, 768 
de Gaulle and, 734, 735 
geopolitical vs. ideological debate and, 
743-45, 756-57 
Helsinki Accords and, 758-60 
human rights debate and, 752-54 
Jackson and, 746-47, 750, 751, 757 


Middle East conflict and, 737-40 
Nixon’s foreign policy and, 741-47, 754- 
756, 761 

Reagan’s first term and, 767-68 
reciprocal concessions vs. unilateral 
satisfactions and, 740-41 
SALT and, 749-52 

Soviet Union and, 123, 737-38, 747 
trade and, 754-55 
Wilsonian ideals and, 743 
deterrence strategy, 608-10, 6l4 
intermediate-range missile deployment 
and, 776, 778 

Mutual Assured Destruction and, 750, 779 
Diem, Ngo Dinh, see Ngo Dinh Diem 
Dien Bien Phu, battle of, 630-31, 632, 633, 
648, 655 

“Difference Between the North Atlantic 
Treaty and Traditional Military 
Alliances,” 458 
Dillon, Douglas, 628-29, 671 
diplomacy: 

alliances concept and, 247 
communist, 334 
Congress system and, 82, 88-91 
European approach to, 616 
negotiations and, 508 
nineteenth-century style of, 27 6 
personalized relations and, 27 6 
in post-Cold War world, 23-24; see also 
new world order 
tacit bargaining and, 753 
triangular, see China, U.S. opening to; 
linkage concept; Nixon, Richard M.; 
Sino-Soviet rift 
Wilsonian vs. European, 248 
Directorate concept, 610-12, 617 
disarmament, 244, 255-56, 267, 279-80, 
285-86, 292-94 

see also ABM Treaty; arms control; 
nuclear weapons; Strategic Arms 
Limitation Talks 

Disarmament Conference (1932-37), 285- 
286, 292, 293, 378 

disengagement plans, 512-13, 599-600 
Disraeli, Benjamin, 37, 39, 100, 145-56, 162, 
167, 249, 763 

on balance-of-power diplomacy, 99 
Balkan crisis and, 152-54 
Berlin Memorandum and, 149 
Congress of Berlin and, 154-55, 156 
on Franco-Prussian War, 134-35 
Gladstone and, 101, 150, 160-61 
London Protocol and, 152 
Russian expansionism and, 151-52 
war scare of 1875 and, 147-48 


884 



Index 


Dittmann, Herbert, 578 
Djilas, Milovan, 4 17, 438 
Dobrynin, Anatoly, 591, 744, 753, 754, 788- 
789 

Dominican Republic, 37, 39 
Domino Theory, 647, 667, 701 
Indochina conflict and, 624, 626-28, 631, 
633, 636, 64 1 

NSC memorandum on, 624, 626-27, 628 
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 143 
Dowling, Walter C, 589 
Dreyfus, Alfred, 230 
Drouyn de Lhuys, Edouard, 113 
Dual Alliance, 159 

Dual Monarchy, see Austro-Hungarian 
Empire 

Dulles, John Foster, 465, 510, 595, 618, 623, 
700, 713, 755 

agent theory of, 577-78, 579 
Aswan Dam project and, 529-30, 538 
background and personality of, 534-35 
Baghdad Pact and, 528 
Churchill contrasted with, 510 
containment policy and, 470, 514, 709 
death of, 580 
Geneva Summit and, 517 
German unification and, 577-78 
Hungarian uprising and, 553, 558, 562, 
564-65 

Indochina conflict and, 631, 632, 633, 
635-39 

liberation theory of, 553-54, 772 
Life article of, 553, 562 
Maritime Conference proposal of, 532, 
535-36, 538, 539, 540 
Northern Tier policy and, 528 
propaganda and policy analysis of, 529- 
530 

SEATO and, 637 

Soviet sphere of influence and policy of, 
508, 529-30, 535, 553-54, 558, 569-70 
Suez crisis and, 532, 533-39, 540 
United Action proposal of, 631-33, 648 
on use of force, 535, 545, 574 
Users’ Association proposal of, 536-37, 
540, 577 

U.S. exceptionalism and, 534, 731 
West Germany in NATO and, 515 
Zhou and, 719 

Dumbarton Oaks Conference (1944), 405 
Durnovo, Peter, 206-7 
Dutch East Indies, 392 

Eastern Europe, 173, 407, 438, 443-44, 446, 
447, 495, 551-53, 566-67, 594-95, 763, 
787, 823-25 


Cold War and, 431-32, 434-35, 438 
communism in, 551-52, 566-67 
de Gaulle’s detente and, 734 
European Security Conference and, 758 
European Union and, 823-24 
France and, 296-97 
Gorbachev and, 793-95 
liberation theory and, 554, 793-95 
in NATO, 823-24 
Partnership for Peace and, 824-25 
U.S. foreign policy and, 427-28, 558, 563 
“Eastern Question,” 91-93, 148 
Fadeyev’s analysis of, 143-44 
see also Balkans 
Eastern Rumelia, 154 
Eden, Anthony, 299, 429, 434, 633 
Arab League promoted by, 523 
Aswan Dam project and, 528-29 
Bulganin’s message to, 542-43 
Canal nationalization as viewed by, 531- 
532 

Eisenhower’s correspondence with, 533— 
534, 537, 538 

Moscow visit of, 398, 406, 407, 413 
Suez crisis and, 528-44, 547, 595 
West Germany in NATO and, 515 
Edward VII, King of England, 177 
“Eggshell, Operation,” 626 
Egypt, 519, 541, 737 

Anglo-French rivalry and, 1 45, 159, 162, 
171, 178, 233-34 

Anglo-Russian rivalry and, 89, 92, 148, 
162, 172 

Aswan Dam project of, 527-30, 538, 539 
China and, 529 

Israel’s rapprochement with, 284, 739 
Soviet arms sales to, 522-26 
Soviets expelled from, 738, 739, 753 
Suez crisis and, see Suez crisis 
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 403, 499, 51 1, 515, 
524, 532, 563, 573, 600, 622, 654, 655, 
706 

Berlin crisis and, 570, 574, 575, 578-82, 
585 

Bulganin and, 542, 543 
Camp David Accords and, 580-82, 600 
Churchill’s correspondence with, 512, 
514, 632-33 

Churchill’s Summit idea rejected by, 
509-10 

de Gaulle’s anti-Americanism and, 606 
de Gaulle’s NATO challenge and, 610-12 
Directorate and, 611, 612 
on Domino Theory, 641 
Geneva Summit and, 516-17 
Hungarian uprising and, 558-59 


885 



Index 


Eisenhower, Dwight D. {cont . ) 

Indochina conflict and, 621, 628-29, 
631-33, 634, 636-39, 642, 644, 646, 
647, 649 

“open-skies” proposal of, 516 
as Reagan precursor, 631-32 
on Sino-Soviet relations, 509 
Stalin’s correspondence with, 417-18 
Suez crisis and, 532-44, 549 
United Action proposal and, 631-32, 633 
Wilsonian theme in foreign policy of, 622 
Eisenhower Administration, 591 
Guatemala coup and, 541 
Hungarian uprising and, 558, 559, 563 
Indochina conflict and, 628-30, 634, 635, 
638-39, 641 

Northern Tier concept of, 527, 528 
U.S.-Soviet negotiations and, 505-6 
Eisenhower Doctrine, 549 
elections, British: 
of 1880, 101, 160-61 
of 1945, 435, 507-8 
of 1950, 508 
elections, U.S.: 
of 1916, 45 
of 1920, 370-71 
of 1940, 388 
of 1948, 469 

of 1952, 499, 501,502,553 
of 1956, 540, 546 
of 1964, 657 

of 1968, 670, 672-73, 675, 695, 721 
of 1972, 689, 692, 695, 697, 739, 743 
of 1976, 766 

Elizabeth I, Queen of England, 177 
Elizabeth Petrovna, Empress of Russia, 140 
Ely, Paul, 631 

Enlightenment, 21-22, 67, 75, 86 
Entente Cordiale, 181, 186, 188, 189, 190, 
191, 253, 728 

Enterprise for the Americas Initiative, 832 
Ethiopia, 300-301, 593, 698, 701, 763, 773- 
774 

Eupen-et-Malmedy, territory of, 239, 283 
Europe: 

balance-of-power system and, 19-20 
Congress of Vienna’s effect on, 79, 324- 
325 (map) 

Congress system and, 82 
Eastern, see Eastern Europe 
on eve of World War I, 326-27 (map) 
JFK’s Declaration of Interdependence 
and, 613-14 

Monroe Doctrine and, 35-36 
nuclear weapons strategy of, 609-10 
in post-Cold War world, 23-24 


post-World War II growth of, 703-4 
prospects for unity, 24, 120, 596, 606-8, 
806, 820-24 

Realpolitik and geography of, 137-38 
reunified Germany and, 820-22, 823 
Suez crisis and unity of, 547-48 
European Defense Community (EDC), 498, 
515 

European Security Conference, see 

Conference on European Security and 
Cooperation 
exceptionalism, U.S.: 
containment and, 471 
disillusionment and, 372 
Dulles’ form of, 534, 731 
isolationism and, 142 
new world order and, 810 
Nixon and, 706, 731, 742, 745 
Peace Movement and, 688 
Reagan and, 767, 769, 785 
Russian exceptionalism vs., 142 
Vietnam War and, 621, 668, 676, 688, 700 
Wilsonianism and, 809-10 
Export/Import Bank, 754 

Fadeyev, Rostislav Andreievich, 143-44 
Farouk I, King of Egypt, 524 
fascism, 308, 335 

Federalist Papers, The (Madison), 21 
Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor, 59, 60- 
62, 65, 66, 83 
Ferguson, A. K., 489 

Finland, 176, 249, 261, 347, 356, 357, 362, 
408, 409, 419, 434, 449 
Soviet Union and, 352, 437, 443-44 
Flanders, Ralph, 629 
Flandin, Pierre, 305 

flexible response strategy, 608, 612-14, 708, 
776,782 

Foch, Ferdinand, 250 
force de frappe, 6 13 
Ford, Gerald R., 744, 760, 772 
Ford, Henry, 389 

Ford Administration, 713, 733, 747, 759, 

760, 766 

Foreign Affairs, 454, 721 
Foreign Ministers’ Conferences (1945-46), 
437-38, 446 

Foreign Office, British, 186, 251, 268, 291, 
305,311 

foreign policy, U.S.: 
anticolonial tradition and, 625-26 
arms control and, 752 
Asian conflicts and geopolitics in, 621- 
625, 827-31 

Austrian Anschluss and, 381 


886 



Index 


balance-of-power doctrine and, 17-21, 

166-67, 221 

bureaucracy and, 717-18 
collective security and, see collective 
security 

colonialism issue and, 524-26 
compartmentalization of, 402-3 
containment and, see containment policy 
Eastern Europe and, 427-28, 563 
European conflicts and geopolitics in, 
30-33, 624-25 

German unification and, 577-78 
human rights and, 622-23, 752; see also 
Helsinki Accords 
isolationists and, 371-73 
Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 374-75 
Kennan’s Long Telegram and, 443, 447- 
449, 454 

Kennan’s “X” article and, 454-56, 715 
linkage debate and, 715, 717-18 
Metternich system and, 166-67 
Monroe Doctrine and, see Monroe 
Doctrine 

moral foundation of, 19-23, 29-30, 33- 
37, 437, 456, 462 

new world order and, 809-10, 813-14, 
832-35 

Nixon Doctrine and, 707-9 
NSC-68 and, 462-63 
post-Cold War world and, 23-24, 166, 
818-20 

presidency and, 741-42; see also specific 
presidents 

raison d’etat and, 810 
and reform in Russia, 814, 817-18 
spread of democracy and, 620-23, 811- 
812 

Suez crisis and, 544-45, 548-49; see also 
Suez crisis 

territorial expansion and, 31, 36, 37 
see also specific countries 
Formosa, see Taiwan 
Fortune , 413 
Foster, John, 534 
Founding Fathers, 30, 462, 525 
Four Freedoms, 389, 390, 391 
Four Policemen concept, 395-98, 408, 411- 
412, 424, 447, 433, 511, 611, 829 
failure of, 420-22 

Holy Alliance compared with, 397-98 
Molotov and, 396-97 
Truman and, 426-27 
Four-Power Agreement, 570-71 
Four-Power Treaty, 373-74, 375 
Fourteen Points, 19, 50, 225, 229-31, 239, 
240, 241, 653-54, 808 


Fourth Neutrality Act (1939), 385-86, 388 
France, 17, 30-31, 69, 80, 89, 90, 132, 145, 
178, 179, 501, 758, 821, 822-23 
Algeciras Conference and, 41, 191 
Alsace-Lorraine issue and, 134, 138, 144, 
159, 180-81, 194, 204, 219, 225, 239, 
269, 351 

Anglo-U.S. relationship and, 376-77, 
596-97, 611, 612, 614 
appeasement policy and, 306-7 
Austria-Piedmont War and, 103, 110-12 
Austro-Prussian War and, 115, 116-18, 
126 

autonomy in NATO and, 600-606, 610- 
612, 614-16, 618 
balance of power and, 68, 70 
Balkans conflict and, 199-200, 203 
Belgian independence and, 97, 222 
Berlin crisis and, 571, 573, 575-77 
Bismarck and, 122-25, 146, 159, 171 
Briand-Stresemann meetings and, 278- 
279 

Britain and, see Anglo-French 
relationship 

communists in, 445, 447, 498 
Congress of Vienna and, 79, 81-82 
Crimean War and, 92-93 
Czechoslovakia and, 120, 275, 27 6, 296, 
303, 308-9, 311, 313, 314-15, 317 
detente and, 734 

disarmament issue and, 256, 279-80, 
285-86, 292-94 

Eastern European allies of, 296-97 
economic decline of, 228-29 
Entente Cordiale and, 181, 186, 188, 189, 
190, 728 

expansion of, 320 (map) 
force de frappe of, 613 
Four-Power Treaty and, 373 
in Franco-Soviet Agreement (1935), 296- 
297, 302, 336 

German rearmament and, 292-94 
Holy Roman Empire and, 56-57, 58, 60, 
62, 64 

Indochina conflict of, 625, 626, 627, 628- 
631, 634, 635, 648 
Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 280-81 
League of Nations and, 235-36 
Locarno Pact and, 273-76, 302, 511 
Maginot Line of, 280, 302, 303 
missile deployment issue and, 77 6, 777 
Munich settlement and, 314, 316-17 
mutual friendship treaty between 
Germany and, 547, 615-17 
North African interests of, 530-31, 625, 
674 


887 



Index 


France ( cont .) 

nuclear strategy and, 609, 610 
Paris Peace Conference and, 232-38 
Peace Movement in, 677 
in Pitt Plan, 7 6 

Poincare-Briand conflict and, 277-78 
population decline of, 228-29 
in post-Locarno period, 278-79 
in post-Revolution era, 105-6 
in post-World War I order, 250-55, 258, 
265 

in post-World War II order and, 395, 396, 
406, 414 

Prussia’s defeat of, 118-19, 148 
public opinion and foreign policy of, 160 
raison d'etat doctrine and, 59, 64-67, 71- 
72, 74, 823 

Rapallo Conference and, 262, 263, 264- 
265 

reparations issue and, 256-58, 262 
Reykjavik Summit and, 783 
Rhineland demilitarization and, 229, 233, 
237, 251, 268, 274, 278, 280, 300-304, 
306, 364 

Romania and, 102, 296 
Ruhr occupation by, 267-69, 272, 372 
Russo-Finnish War and, 352 
in SEATO, 637 

second Moroccan crisis and, 196-97 
self-image in foreign policy of, 119-20 
Sino-Soviet rift and, 720 
Spanish Civil War and, 308 
Stalin’s Peace Note and, 499 
Stresemann’s fulfillment policy and, 269, 
271-72, 273, 282 

Suez crisis and, 523, 530-32, 533, 536, 
539-41, 543-44, 547, 548, 559, 562, 
563, 597 

Treaty of Mutual Assistance and, 253-55 
Tunisia and, 159 
United Action proposal and, 631 
Versailles settlement and, 234, 239-40, 
242-43 

West Germany in NATO and, 515-16 
West Germany’s friendship treaty with, 
547, 615-17 

in withdrawal from NATO, 611, 6l 2, 735 
World War I aftermath and, 221, 228-29, 
250-55, 258, 265 

World War I outbreak and, 205-6, 210, 
212-13, 216, 384-85 
World War II’s effect on, 352-55, 359, 
386, 395, 396, 406, 4l4, 602-3 
see also Anglo-French relationship 
Franche-Comte region, 59-60 
Franco, Francisco, 307 


Frangois-Poncet, Andr£, 303, 304 
Franco-Prussian War, 103, 118-19, 120, 
134-35, 138, 204, 229, 256-57 
Franco-Russian Agreement (1891), 180-81, 
182, 202, 203, 204 

Franco-Soviet Agreement (1935), 296-97, 
302, 336 

Franz Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria, 209, 
211 

Frederick II (the Great), King of Prussia, 40, 
80, 129, 130, 169, 172, 350, 423 
raison d'etat doctrine and, 69 
Frederick III, King of Germany, 170 
Frederick William IV, King of Prussia, 130 
French General Staff, 303, 343, 351 
French Revolution, 22, 30, 62, 74, 85, 105, 
120, 123, 134, 258, 806 
Fulbright, J. William, 650, 666, 667, 672, 689 
fulfillment policy, 269, 271-72, 273, 27 6, 
282 

G-7 Summit, 795 
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 711 
Gamelin, Maurice, 303-4 
General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs 
(GATT), 832 

General Assembly, U.N., 249, 478, 542, 562 
Geneva Accords (1954), 633, 634-36, 637, 
639, 651, 719 

Laotian neutrality and, 646 
Geneva Protocol (1924), 254-55 
Geneva Summit (1955), 516-19, 520, 522, 
581, 582 

Genoa Conference, see Rapallo Conference 
Gentz, Friedrich von, 140, 142 
Gerasimov, Gennadi, 792, 794 
Gerlach, Leopold von, 124-27, 130, 134, 

146 

German Confederation, 81, 109, 229 
Austria’s role in, 123 
Bismarck and, 117, 129 
and conflict over Schleswig-Holstein, 
112-13 

German unification and, 134 
Prussia’s role in, 104, 122 
German states: 

Austro-Prussian War and, 117 
Congress of Vienna and, 80-81, 85 
Franco-Prussian War and, 118-19 
Holy Roman Empire and, 56, 57, 59-60 
German unification, 76, 137-38, 144-46, 
169, 518, 520, 618 

Berlin crisis and, 571-73, 577-78, 587 
Berlin Wall and, 734 

Bismarck and, 65-66, 105, 119, 121, 133— 
134, 229, 239 


888 



Index 


Brandt and, 734-36 
Dulles and, 577-78 
European Union and, 820-23 
Gaullist policies and, 618-19 
German Confederation and, 134 
Gorbachev’s agreement to, 795 
Napoleon III and, 104-5, 116-17 
NATO and, 506-7, 735-36 
new world order and, 820-22 
Ostpolitik and, 734-37 
Social Democrats and, 498, 503-4 
Stalin’s Peace Note and, 499-502, 571-72 
U.S. foreign policy and, 577-78 
Germany, Democratic Republic of (East), 
229, 499, 506, 551, 568, 793 
Access Authority proposal and, 590-92 
Berlin crisis and, 569, 571, 577, 583-84, 
590, 591-92, 593 
Gorbachev’s visit to, 794 
Hallstein Doctrine and, 461, 734, 735 
Soviet recognition of, 520 
Stalin’s Peace Note and, 500 
Germany, Federal Republic of (West), 445, 
758, 821 

Access Authority proposal and, 590-92 
Berlin crisis and, 569, 572, 577-78, 583- 
584, 587-89, 590-91, 592 
creation of, 460-61, 494-95, 568 
election of 1982, 776 
France’s mutual friendship treaty with, 
547, 615-17 

Hallstein Doctrine of, 461, 734, 735 
integration of with West, 447, 498, 500, 
506, 507-8, 594, 820-23 
Locarno Pact and, 273-7 6, 277, 511 
missile deployment issue and, 775-78 
NATO and, 474, 498, 499, 515-16, 736 
nuclear weapons in, 599-600, 784, 791 
Ostpolitik and, 735-37 
Peace Movement and, 677 
rise of Adenauer in, 498 
Germany, Imperial, 74, 99-100, 103, 111, 
139, 148, 176, 201, 268, 607 
Algeciras Conference and, 190-91 
Alsace-Lorraine issue and, 134, 138, 144, 
159, 180, 219 

Austria’s secret treaty with, 158-59 
Bismarck’s legacy to, 105, 136, 157-59, 
169-72, 178-80 

Bosnia-Herzegovina crisis (1908) and, 
195-96 

Brest-Litovsk Treaty and, 220, 257, 258- 
259 

Britain and, 182-88 
Entente Cordiale and, 190 
Franco- Russian Agreement and, 181 


Kruger Telegram and, 184-85 
Moroccan crisis and, 190-91, 196 
national movements and, 183-84 
Navy Bill of, 188 

post-Bismarck foreign policy of, 169-72, 
178-80 

public opinion in, 162-63, 182-83 
Reinsurance Treaty and, 164, 179-80, 

181, 189 

Triple Alliance, 159, 186 

TR’s view of, 41, 42-43 

World War I aftermath and, 221, 289-90; 

see also Versailles, Treaty of 
World War I outbreak and, 48-51, 204-5, 
208-10, 215, 216, 349 
Germany, Nazi, 76, 288, 300, 334, 349, 446, 
818 

Austria’s Anschluss with, 249, 283, 297, 
310, 381 

British declaration of war on, 385 
British Naval Accord with, 297-98 
collapse of, 423-24 
Czechoslovakia occupied by, 316-17, 
318, 337, 339, 340, 364 
declaration of war on U.S. by, 368, 392- 
393, 394, 399 

Disarmament Conference and, 292, 293, 
378 

expansion of, 321 (map) 

France’s fall to, 352-55, 359, 386 
Halifax’s visit to, 307-8 
Hitler-Molotov meetings and, 361-62, 
364 

identified as aggressor nation, 383, 384 
Molotov’s visit to, 357-59 
Munich settlement and, 314-16 
Poland invaded by, 351, 364, 385 
Poland’s nonaggression pact with, 296 
rearmament of, 291-95 
Rhineland reoccupied by, 301-5 
Soviet Union invaded by, 391, 394, 399 
Soviet Union in war plans of, 367-68, 419 
Soviet Union’s rapprochement with, 262, 
263-65, 267, 270, 282, 355-56 
Spanish Civil War and, 307-8 
Tripartite Pact signed by, 356 
see also Nazi-Soviet Nonaggression Pact 
Germany, Weimar, 279, 314 
Anglo-French split and, 250-55 
British aid to, 271-72 
fulfillment policy of, 269, 271-72, 273, 
276, 282 

Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 281 
League of Nations and, 250, 274, 278, 292 
parity-security dichotomy and, 285-86 
Polish border issue and, 281-82 


889 



Index 


Germany, Weimar ( cont .) 
post-World War I order and, 250-53 
Rapallo Conference and, 263-64 
reparations and, 257-58, 272, 284-85 ; see 
also Versailles, Treaty of 
Russo-Polish War and, 261-62 
Soviet rapprochement with, 26l, 262, 
263-65, 267, 270, 282 
Treaty of Mutual Assistance and, 254 
Gero, Erno, 535-56 
Glubb, John, 523, 529 
Giers, Nikolai de, 175, 179, 181, 202, 204 
Gladstone, William E., 100, 177 
Bismarck and, 162 

collective security and, 51, 74, 97, 160 
Disraeli and, 101, 150, 152, 160-61 
Midlothian Campaign of, 160-61 
morality in foreign policy of, 152, 155, 
160-62 

on obligations arising from alliances, 97 
William II and, 182 
Wilson compared with, 160-61 
glasnost , 796-97, 798 
Glorious Revolution, 71 
Goebbels, Joseph, 294-95, 420, 423, 430 
Goltz, Count von der, 114-15, 116 
Gomulka, Wladyslaw, 552, 554-56, 561 
Goodell, Charles, 687 
Good Neighbor policy, 831 
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 229, 417, 455, 520, 763, 
765, 817 

arms race and, 790-92 
August coup and, 786 
Berlin Wall and, 794-95 
Brezhnev Doctrine abandoned by, 793- 
794 

character of, 785-86 
Common European Home idea of, 791 
domestic reforms of, 785-87, 793-98 
East European unrest and, 793-94 
German unification and, 795 
glasnost and, 796-97, 798 
Kissinger’s first meeting with, 798 
named “Man of the Decade,” 799 
peaceful coexistence and, 790 
perestroika and, 788, 791, 796-97, 798 
and Reagan’s dream of reconciliation, 
770-71 

regional autonomy encouraged by, 797- 
798 

resignation of, 786 
at Reykjavik Summit, 782, 783, 790 
Soviet foreign policy shaped by, 787-91 
spheres of influence renounced by, 

794 

Time interview of, 790 


U.N. speech of, 791, 792 
Wilsonian themes and, 789 
Yeltsin and, 786 

Gorchakov, Aleksandr, 1 41, 147, 151, 153, 
154-55, 175, 176 
Grace of Alais, 61-62 
graduated response strategy, 652 
Grand Alliance, 71, 142, 246, 322 (map) 
Gray, Gordon, 582 

Great Britain, 30, 37, 69 , 76, 80, 113, 11 5, 
116, 184, 207, 209-10, 434, 508, 812, 
821 

Abyssinian crisis and, 298-300 
Algeciras Conference and, 190-91 
Anglo-Russian Entente and, 191-92 
Anglo-Soviet spheres-of-influence 
proposal of, 413-14 

appeasement policy of, 306-7, 310, 311- 
312, 340 

Aswan Dam project and, 528-29 
Atlantic Charter violations considered by, 
407 

Austria and, 99-100, 153 
Austro-German alliance and, 159 
balance-of-power diplomacy and, 17, 70- 
73, 90, 98, 145, 220, 266, 823, 826 
Balkan issue and, 148-49, 160, 196, 198 
Berlin crisis and, 571, 573, 578 
Bismarck and, 122, 145, 146, 159-60, 171 
Central America and, 38 
Churchill and post-World War II 
diplomacy of, 428-30, 432 
collective security and, 88, 97, 266-67 
Common Market and, 596, 615 
Congress of Berlin and, 153, 154, 155— 
156 

Congress of Vienna and, 79 
Congress system and, 88-90, 95 
containment policy and, 467-68 
Crimean War and, 93, 94 
Czechoslovakia crisis and, 309, 312-18 
declaration of war on Germany by, 385 
declining global role of, 177-78, 595-99 
destroyers-for-bases deal and, 387-88 
Directorate concept and, 611-12 
disarmament issue and, 256, 279, 609, 
610 

Eastern Mediterranean policy of, 99-100 
Four-Power Treaty and, 373 
France and, see Anglo-French 
relationship 

Franco-Russian Agreement and, 181 
German navy and, 185, 188, 297-98 
German-Polish border issue and, 281-82 
German rearmament and, 291-95 
Germany’s colonial agreement with, 180 


890 



Index 


Germany’s post-Bismarck diplomacy 
with, 178-80, 182-87 
Glorious Revolution of, 71 
in Grand Alliance, 71-72 
Greek independence and, 98 
Greek-Turkish aid program and, 451-52 
Hitler’s strategy and, 309, 353, 355, 363, 
364-65 

Holy Roman Empire and, 56-57 
India and, 26, 41, 142, 151, 172, 178, 

233 

Indochina conflict and, 632-33 
Iran and, 523-24 

isolationist sentiment in, 72-74, 96-97 
Japan’s alliance with, 42, 171, 187-88 
Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 281 
Korean War and, 478 
Kruger Telegram and, 184-85 
League of Nations concept and, 223 
Lend-Lease and, 388 
Locarno Pact and, 273-76, 277, 278-79, 
305, 511 

Mediterranean Agreement and, 1 59, 

178 

Monroe Doctrine and, 35-36 
Munich Agreement and, see Munich 
Conference 

Nassau Agreement and, 601-2 
national interest doctrine of, 95-96 
Nazi-Soviet Pact and, 346-47, 348 
Ottoman Empire and, 101, 148, 151, 152, 
153, 156, 222 

Paris Peace Conference and, 232, 233-34, 
237-38 

parity-security dichotomy and, 285 
"Perfidious Albion” epithet of, 98 
Poland unilaterally guaranteed by, 342- 
344, 345, 348 

post-World War I order and, 220-21, 
227, 229, 230, 250-53 
post- World War II order and, 395-96, 
399, 406, 420-21 
pragmatic diplomatic style of, 98 
public opinion and foreign policy of, 
100-101, 160-61, 213 
in Quadruple Alliance, 82 
Rapallo Conference and, 263, 264-65 
Reykjavik Summit and, 783 
Rhineland reoccupation and, 277, 301-5 
and rise of Hitler, 291, 293-94 
Ruhr crisis and, 267-68 
Russia and, 89, 98, 100, 142, 151, 171, 188, 
191-92 

Russo-Finnish War and, 352 
in SEATO, 637 

second front strategy and, 403, 404 


Skybolt affair and, 601-2 
Spanish Civil War and, 308 
"splendid isolation” doctrine of, 97, 139, 
145, 157, 167, 176-77, 178, 183, 185- 
186, 189, 37 6 

Stalin’s Peace Note response of, 499 
Stresa Conference and, 297-98 
Stresemann’s fulfillment policy and, 269, 
271-72, 273 

Suez Canal nationalization reaction of, 
531 

Suez crisis and, 523, 525-27, 531, 532, 
533, 536, 539-41, 543-44, 546, 547, 
548, 559, 562, 563, 597 
Treaty of Mutual Assistance and, 253-55 
Triple Entente and, 182-83, 192-94 
United Action proposal rejected by, 631, 
632-33 

U.S. and, see Anglo-American relationship 
Versailles settlement and, 230, 239-40, 
242, 243, 244, 256-58 
war strategy and foreign policy of, 147- 
148, 403 

Washington Naval Conference and, 373 
West Germany in NATO and, 516 
Wilsonian ideals and, 248-49 
World War I outbreak and, 205, 207, 209- 
210, 212-13, 216, 384-85 
Great Depression, 283, 286, 291, 370, 379 
Great Society, 661 

Greece, 92, 98, 340, 342, 362, 366, 413, 414, 
421, 453, 524, 620, 629 
Anglo-U.S. aid to, 451-52, 469 
guerrilla war in, 447, 451 
Greek Revolution (1821), 89, 156 
Greek-Turkish aid program, 451-52, 469, 
473, 474 
Greenland, 389 
Greenwood, Arthur, 305 
Greer (U.S. destroyer), 392, 659 
Grey, Edward, 95-96, 191, 193-94, 212, 
213, 220, 223-24, 353 
Gromyko, Andrei, 175, 358, 436, 519, 581, 
586, 727, 770, 777 
Guatemala, 541 
guerrilla warfare: 

conventional warfare vs., 629-30 
in Greece, 447, 451 
in Malaya, 652 

U.S. military policy and, 644, 648, 652, 
660-61 

in Vietnam, 639-41, 645, 649 
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 658-59 
Gulf War, 53, 250, 257, 475, 477, 614, 623, 
659, 820 

Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, 62 


891 



Index 


Habsburgs, 57, 58, 59-60, 64, 72, 80, 98, 
122, 806 

Haile Selassie, Emperor of Ethiopia, 299, 
300 

Haiti, 39, 809 
Halberstam, David, 669 
Haldane, Richard Burdon, Lord, 188 
Halifax, Edward Frederick Lindley Wood, 
Lord, 307, 311, 342, 353 
Halliday, Fred, 800 
Hallstein Doctrine, 461, 734, 735 
Hamilton, Alexander, 33 
Hanover, Kingdom of, 69, 80, 117 
Hardenberg, Karl August von, 78 
Harding, Warren G., 373, 374 
Harriman, Averell, 428, 465, 651, 677, 

684 

Harrison, Benjamin, 534 
Hatzfeldt, Count, 187 
Haussmann, Georges Eugene, 107 
Havel, Vaclav, 759 
Hayden, Tom, 668 
Helsinki Accords, 518, 760 
Basket III of, 759, 772, 793 
detente and, 758-60 
Final Act of, 18, 760 
New York Times editorial on, 760 
Hendrickson, David, 34 
Henry V, King of England, 125 
Herald-Tribune Forum, 382 
Herriot, Edouard, 254, 285 
Hesse-Cassel, 117 
Hilsman, Roger, 652 
Hindenburg, Paul von, 279 
Hitler, Adolf, 141, 256, 288-318, 378, 408, 
440 

appointed Chancellor, 291, 377 
Britain in strategy of, 353, 354, 363, 364- 
365 

Chamberlain’s meetings with, see Munich 
Conference 

and declaration of war on U.S., 368, 392- 
393, 394, 399 

demagoguery and egomania of, 288-91, 
332 

German generals and, 309-10 
long-term strategy of, 309-10 
Molotov’s meetings with, 360-62, 363, 
434 

Munich settlement and, 314-16, 317 
negotiating style of, 312, 345-47, 358-59 
reaction of western democracies to, 291— 
292, 294-95, 301-2, 305 
revised secret protocol and, 350-52 
Rhineland occupation and, 301-2, 306 
separate peace proposal and, 419-20 


Stalin’s relationship with, 332-35, 336, 
355, 357-58, 364, 368 
U.S. domestic policy and, 384, 423-24 
Wilsonianism and, 317 
Hitler-Stalin Pact, see Nazi-Soviet 
Nonaggression Pact 
Hoare, Samuel, 299 
Ho Chi Minh, 663-64, 678 
Ho Chi Minh Trail, 641, 646, 660, 680, 693, 
696 

Hoffmann, Max, 259-60 
Hoffmann, Stanley, 768-69 
Holstein, Friedrich von, 184 
Holy Alliance, 36, 88, 146, 149, 242, 458 
Austria in, 35, 82, 83, 119, 130, 131 
Bismarck’s diplomacy and, 121, 122, 124, 
125 

Congress of Paris and, 108 
Congress of Vienna and, 82-84 
Four Policemen concept compared with, 
397-98 

Napoleon III and, 93, 105 
operational significance of, 84 
Holy Roman Empire: 
decline of, 65, 80 
dominance of, 56-58, 61 
France and, 56-57, 58, 60, 62, 64 
German states and, 56, 57, 59-60 
Honecker, Erich, 794 
Hoover, Herbert, 49 
Hopkins, Harry, 410, 416, 430-32, 444 
Hossbach, Friedrich, 309 
House, Edward, 223, 224, 238, 256, 381 
House of Commons, British, 212, 248, 275, 
295-96, 466-67, 510, 531, 543 
House of Representatives, U.S., 381, 388 
Howe, Geoffrey, 780 

Hiibner, Joseph, Baron von, 106, 107, 110 
Hull, Cordell, 378, 388, 400-401, 402, 406- 
407, 623 
human rights: 

detente and, 752-54 
Jackson Amendment and, 754 
Jewish emigration issue and, 752-54 
Reagan’s policy of, 772-73 
Sino-American relationship and, 830-31 
U.S. foreign policy and, 622-23, 752 
see also Helsinki Accords 
Hungarian Revolution (1848), 98 
Hungarian Revolution (1956), 519, 548, 
550-67, 595 
aftermath of, 567 
Cold War and, 550-51, 564, 566 
Eisenhower and, 558-59 
India and, 562, 564 
liberation theory and, 553-54, 558 


892 



Index 


Nonaligned group and, 562, 563-64 
onset of, 555-56 
Polish uprising and, 554-56 
Radio Free Europe and, 557-58, 562 
roots of, 551 

Soviet suppression of, 542, 543, 560-62 
State Department and, 562-63 
Suez crisis and, 565-66 
Titoism and, 552-54 
U.N. and, 557, 559, 561, 562, 563 
U.S. and, 553, 557, 558-59, 563, 564-65 
Hungary, 57, 176, 243, 249, 313, 356, 413, 
434, 437, 443, 793, 816, 817, 823, 824 
Hussein, King of Jordan, 529, 739 
Hussein, Saddam, 475, 546 

Iceland, 390, 392 
Ignatyev, Nicholas, 153 
imperialism, 150, 401-2, 525, 763 
India, 523, 527, 627, 637, 807-8 
Britain and, 26, 41, 142, 151, 172, 178, 233 
Hungarian uprising and, 562, 564 
post-Cold War world and, 23-24, 26 
Russian expansionism and, 100, 140, 142, 
145, 151, 172 
India-Pakistan War, 713 
Indochina conflict, 392, 488, 509, 514, 603, 
620-42 

Associated States designation and, 625 
Cambodia invasion and, 641 
China and, 630, 634, 635, 644-45, 660- 
661, 681 

Churchill’s perception of, 632-33 
communist rivalries and, 627 
Dien Bien Phu battle in, 630-31, 632, 

633 

Domino Theory and, 624, 626-28, 631, 
633, 636, 641 

Eisenhower Administration and, 628-30, 
634, 635, 638-39, 641 
FDR’s attitude toward, 625 
Geneva Accords and, 630, 634-35 
guerrilla warfare and, 629-30, 639-41 
JFK and, 639, 641, 643-44, 645, 647-48, 
650, 651, 653 

NSC-64 and, 623-24, 626-28 
"Operation Eggshell” and, 626 
partition of Vietnam and, 634-35 
SEATO and, 637 

Soviet Union and, 624, 627, 634, 635, 

720 

surrogate nature of, 624-25 
Truman Administration and, 625-27 
Truman and, 625-26, 628, 649 
United Action proposal and, 631, 632- 
634, 648 


U.S. entry into, 621-26 
see also Vietnam War; specific countries 
Indonesia, 392, 627, 628, 632, 633, 637 
Industrial Revolution, 106, 602 
integrated forces concept, 614-15 
Inter-Allied Military Control Commission 
(IMCC), 239, 256, 278, 279, 314 
International Access Authority, 590-91, 592 
internationalism, 372-73, 374 
Iran, 363, 449, 523-24, 527, 548, 815 
Iraq, 250, 257, 299, 449, 523, 527, 541, 546, 
548, 608 

Iron Curtain speech, 441, 442-43, 466, 504 
isolationism, isolationists, 18, 29, 805, 820 
Anglo-American relationship and, 96-97, 
101,385 

British Parliament and, 72-74 
British “splendid” practice of, 139, 145, 
157, 167, 176-77, 178, 183, 185-86, 
189, 37 6 

Congressional legislation of, 378 
conscription and, 388 
Great Debate and, 799-800 
Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 373 
League of Nations opposed by, 372-73 
Lend-Lease opposed by, 388-89 
Quarantine Speech reaction of, 379 
Treaty of Versailles and, 238, 241-42 
U.S. exceptional ism and, 142 
U.S. foreign policy and, 369-73, 378, 381, 
470 

Wilsonianism and, 44, 45-46 
Israel, 228, 523, 537, 540, 544, 737, 738-40 
Egypt’s rapprochement with, 284, 739 
Iraqi reactor strike by, 608 
Nasser’s policy on, 527-28 
1948 War and, 524 
Suez invasion ploy of, 540 
see also Arab-Israeli War of 1973; Suez 
crisis 

Israeli-Palestinian Peace Agreement (1993), 
528, 740 

Italy, 79, 93, 94, 116, 118, 122, 178, 190, 224- 
225, 274, 306, 360, 404, 434, 447 
Abyssinia and, 53, 249, 298-300 
Algeciras Conference and, 191 
communists in, 445, 447, 498 
France-Piedmont-Austria War and, 110— 
112 

German-Austrian union and, 297, 300 
Habsburg rule in, 56, 57, 59, 98 
Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 281 
as Locarno guarantor, 275, 299, 300 
Mediterranean Agreement and, 159 
Munich crisis and, 313-14 
Rhineland reoccupation and, 301 


893 



Index 


Italy {cont.) 

Spanish Civil War and, 307-8 
Stresa Conference and, 297-99, 300 
Triple Alliance and, 159, 186, 356 
in World War 1,219, 231 
in World War II, 300-301, 383-86 
Izvestia, 560 

Jackson, Henry, 746-47, 750, 751, 753-54, 
757 

Jackson Amendment, 754 
James II, King of England, 71 
Jameson, Leander S., 184 
Jansenius (Cornelius Otto Jansen), 63-64, 
65 

Japan, 354, 359-60, 363, 379, 384, 447, 495, 
620, 632, 633, 658, 728, 826 
Britain’s alliance with, 42, 171, 187-88 
China and, 25-26, 249, 286-87, 298, 377, 
379, 380, 385, 826-30 
Four-Power Treaty and, 373 
Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 281 
Korea and, 57, 187, 476, 491 
opening of, 25-26 

Pearl Harbor attack by, 370, 392, 393, 

399 

in post-Cold War world, 23-24, 827, 
828-29 

post-World War II growth of, 703-4 
Russian expansionism and, 174 
Soviet entry into World War II and, 41 4, 
415-16, 435 

Soviet nonaggression pact with, 365-66 
Tripartite Pact signed by, 356 
U.S. negotiations with, 392 
U.S. occupation of, 625 
Versailles settlement and, 239 
in war with Russia, 173-76, 190, 192, 194, 
195, 196, 214, 416 

Washington Naval Conference and, 373 
in withdrawal from League of Nations, 
287 

Jaruzelski, Wojciech, 793, 794 
Jefferson, Thomas, 30, 32, 33, 34, 39, 468 
Johnson, Andrew, 37 
Johnson, Hugh S., 389 
Johnson, Louis, 459-60 
Johnson, Lyndon B., 584, 623, 628, 671-73, 
743 

antiwar movement and, 669, 675 
bombing halted by, 672, 693 
critics of, 663, 665-70 
Diem assessed by, 650 
Fulbright’s criticism of, 667 
1968 candidacy declined by, 672-73 
Saigon mission of, 649-50 


San Antonio Formula of, 664-65, 669, 670 
Vietnam goals explained by, 661-62 
Vietnam situation inherited by, 656, 657- 
658 

Vietnam War expansion rejected by, 660 
Johnson Administration, 656-57, 678 
China misread by, 644-45, 661 
peace program of, 679 
Tonkin Gulf Resolution and, 658-59 
Joint Chiefs of Staff, U.S., 405, 476, 486, 626, 
631, 651 

Joint Declaration of Liberated Europe, 415, 
418 

Jordan, 523, 529, 541, 713, 738-39 
Junkers, 183-84, 503 

Kadar, Janos, 561-62, 567 
Kaganovich, Lazar, 419, 499, 519, 554 
Kant, Immanuel, 86 
Kapital, Das (Marx), 289 
Kars, territory of, 108 
Katkov, Mikhail, 142-43 
Katyn massacres, 405, 411 
Kaufmann, Konstantin, 152, 175 
Kellogg, Frank Billings, 374-75, 377 
Kellogg-Briand Pact, 18, 808-9 
isolationism and, 373 
Monroe Doctrine and, 281 
public opinion and, 375-76 
signing of, 280-81 
Stalin’s reaction to, 334 
U.S. foreign policy and, 374-75 
Kennan, George, 147-48, 438, 562, 583, 618 
on containment policy, 144, 464, 471, 

792, 801 

disengagement theory of, 512-13 
Lippmann compared with, 465-66 
Long Telegram of, 443, 447-49, 454 
on Russian Imperial rule, 551 
on Russo-German alliance, 181, 264 
on Suez crisis, 545 
“X” article of, 454-56, 715 
Kennedy, Edward M. “Ted,” 678 
Kennedy, John F., 590, 595, 600, 628, 655, 
658, 676, 700, 831 
Adenauer and, 589-91 
assassination of, 653, 656, 657, 668 
Atlantic partnership vision of, 616-17 
Bay of Pigs and, 583, 646, 64 7-48 
Berlin crisis and, 584, 585-86, 591 
Berlin Wall reaction of, 584 
Cuban missile crisis and, 591 
Declaration of Interdependence of, 613 
human rights in foreign policy of, 622- 
623 

inaugural speech of, 19, 622-23 


894 



Index 


Indochina conflict and, 639, 641, 643-44, 
645, 647-48, 650, 651, 652 
Laotian neutrality and, 646-47 
nation-building concept and, 648-49 
NATO attitude of, 585-86, 612 
partnership policy of, 601, 61 6 
Vienna Summit and, 645 
Kennedy Administration, 583, 387, 591, 644, 
645, 663 

Diems overthrow and, 654-55, 657 
flexible response strategy and, 612-13 
Mutual Assured Destruction doctrine of, 
750 

NAT O policy of, 6 1 2- 1 4 
nuclear strategy and, 601-2, 612-13 
Skybolt affair and, 601-2 
Kerr, Philip, 233 
Keynes, John Maynard, 257 
Khiva, principality of, 152 
Khmer Rouge, 694, 697 
Khrushchev, Nikita, 476, 505, 51 6, 518-23, 
539, 563, 566, 736, 764, 787, 790, 795, 
796 

Berlin crisis and, 190-91, 569-71, 574, 
575, 580-82, 585-93, 599, 606, 735, 
758 

bravado diplomacy of, 543, 548 
Camp David Accords and, 580, 581-82, 
600 

Dulles on, 569-70 
on Geneva Summit, 518-19 
Macmillan’s visit to, 578-79, 598-99, 600 
Polish uprising and, 554-55, 556 
Stalin denounced by, 552, 555, 704 
U-2 affair and, 582 
Vienna Summit and, 645 
“wars of national liberation” and, 644 
Kim II Sung, 476, 483 
Kipling, Rudyard, 43 
Kissinger, Henry A.: 

Adenauer briefed by, 588-90 
de Gaulle’s encounters with, 604-5 
detente position as stated by, 747, 757 
Dobrynin’s meeting with, 788-89 
Gorbachev s first meeting with, 798 
Korean stalemate recommendation of, 
487-88 

LBJ and, 670, 671 

McNamara-Hanoi exchanges and, 663-64 
Paris Peace Accords negotiations and, 
683-84, 686-87 
Reagan briefed by, 766 
Rockefeller policy statement drafted by, 
721 

secret Beijing trip of, 726, 730-31 
Shanghai Communique and, 727 


Solzhenitsyn appeals by, 754 
Tho and, 686-87 
Truman’s meeting with, 425 
Vietnam extrication and, 663-64, 677-78, 
680, 682-84, 686-87, 691-93, 695 
Vietnamization memorandum of, 682-83 
Zhou and, 719, 727 
see also China, U.S. opening to 
Kliuchevsky, Vasili, 140 
Knox, Philander Chase, 54 
Kohl, Helmut, 777-78, 821 
Kohler, Foy, 562 
Kokand, principality of, 152 
Koniev, Ivan, 418 
Korea, 41, 57, 176, 187 
Korea, People’s Republic of (North), 249, 
474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 608, 827 
Korea, Republic of (South), 469, 474, 475- 
476, 625 

Korean War, 403, 473-92, 645, 708 
China’s intervention in, 476, 477, 478, 
479, 481-85, 488, 625, 661, 719 
China’s perception of U.S. and, 479-82 
containment policy and, 479, 487, 489-90 
global threat and, 624-25, 626 
Inchon landing in, 480 
Japan and, 476, 491 

MacArthur’s strategy for, 480-81, 484-86, 
665 

NATO and, 491 
negotiations in, 488-89 
onset of, 474-76 
Sino-Soviet rift and, 483, 488, 491 
Soviet Union and, 249, 477, 478, 483, 487, 
488, 491-92, 495, 498 
stalemate policy and, 485-89 
Stalin and, 476, 478, 483, 492, 495, 498, 
500 

U.N. and, 249, 477, 478 
U.S. war aims in, 477-78, 480, 481-84, 
486, 489, 490 

Vietnam War contrasted with, 490, 659- 

660, 665 

Kostov, Traicho, 552 
Kosygin, Aleksei, 748 
Kovacz, B&a, 560 
Kozlov, Frol, 580 
Krivoshein, Aleksandr, 214 
Kruger, Paul, 184-85 
Kruger Telegram, 184-85 
Kuwait, 299 

Labour Party, British, 150, 286, 293, 305 
LaFontaine, Oscar, 776 
Laibach, Congress of, 90, 91, 149, 155 
Lake, Anthony, 682 


895 



Index 


Lamartine, Alphonse de, 106 
Lamsdorff, Vladimir, 175, 181 
Lansdowne, Henry Charles Keith Petty- 
Fitzmaurice, Lord, 186-89 
Lansing, Robert, 534 

Laos, 583, 625, 637, 651, 680-81, 696, 698 
violated neutrality of, 645-47, 693 
Lattre de Tassigny, Jean-Marie-Gabriel de, 
648 

Latvia, 347 

Laval, Pierre, 298, 299 
League of Nations, 18, 310 
Abyssinian crisis and, 298-99, 300 
Anglo-French split and, 253-55 
Austria annexation and, 311 
British impetus for, 223 
collective security concept and, 30, 53, 
222, 235-37, 268-69 
enforcement and, 249, 282, 286-87, 374, 
450, 808 

Geneva Protocol and, 254-55 
Germany in, 250, 274, 278, 292 
IMCC and, 279 

Japan’s withdrawal from, 287 
Monroe Doctrine as model for, 224, 

372 

Preparatory Committee of, 279 
Rhineland reoccupation and, 302 
Soviet Union and, 249, 250, 335—36 
TR on, 53-54 

Treaty of Mutual Assistance, 253, 255 
U.S. nonratification of, 54, 90, 91, 241-42, 
250 

Versailles settlement and, 230, 232, 248 
Wilson’s vision of, 30, 51, 223-24, 234- 
235 

Leahy, William D., 431 
Lebanon, 541-42, 549, 614 
Lebensraum, 346, 360 
Le Due Tho, 684-87, 690, 691 
Lee Kuan Yew, 628 

legitimacy principle, 94, 107, 117, 127, 146, 
211,811 

balance of power and, 82-83, 167 
Prussian patriotism and, 125-26 
revolutionary wars and, 655 
Russian pursuit of, 141-42, 144, 156 
Vietnam War and, 655 
Legvold, Robert, 336 
Lend-Lease Act, 388-89, 431, 753 
Lenin, V. I., 231, 258-61, 334, 552, 785, 

797 

Lesseps, Ferdinand de, 530 
Lewis, Anthony, 768 
liberalism, 82, 104, 122 
Bismarck and, 128 


Liberal Party, British, 295 
liberation theory, 553-54, 558, 772 
Liddell Hart, B. H., 778 
Life, 553, 562 

Lincoln, Abraham, 370, 393 
Lindbergh, Charles A., 389 
linkage concept, 715-19, 733 
detente and, 740-41 
Nixon and, 715,717-19 
Sonnenfeldt’s summation of, 758-59 
Soviet Union and, 716-17 
trade and, 754-55 
Lin Piao, 644-45, 661, 725 
Lippmann, Walter, 410, 471, 478, 624, 667 
on containment policy, 463-66, 467, 
665-66 

Kennan compared with, 465-66 
on Suez crisis, 545 
on Vietnam War, 666 
Liska, George, 779-80 
Lithuania, 347, 351 
Litvinov, Maxim, 335, 344 
Lloyd, Selwyn, 599 

Lloyd George, David, 197, 218, 252-53, 

270 

Paris Peace Conference and, 230, 231-32 
Rapallo Conference and, 258, 262, 263, 
264, 267 

Wilson memorandum of, 241 
Locarno Pact, 273, 302, 311, 314, 337, 824- 
825 

Chamberlain’s role in, 277 
Germany’s re-emergence and, 283-84, 
285, 290, 301, 303, 304, 378 
NATO-Soviet relations and, 511 
Rhineland and, 298, 300, 301, 304 
Versailles system undermined by, 274- 
27 6, 278-79, 283-84, 306, 307 
Lodge, Henry Cabot, 41, 655, 663 
Loftus, Lord Augustus, 151 
London, Treaty of (1915), 231 
London Conference (1913), 199 
London Protocol (1877), 152 
Long Telegram (Kennan), 443, 447-49, 454 
Longworth, Alice Roosevelt, 389 
Lorraine, Duchy of, 60 
Louis XIII, King of France, 62 
Louis XIV, King of France, 66, 70, 71, 129, 
205 

Louis XVI, King of France, 144 
Louis XVIII, King of France, 78 
Lovett, Robert, 465 
Lublin Committee, 413, 415 
Luce, Henry, 529 
Lusitania, 48 
Luxembourg, 42, 118 


896 



Index 


Lynd, Staughton, 668 
Lytton Commission, 287 

Maastricht Treaty, 616 
MacArthur, Douglas, 475, 476, 480-86, 488, 
659, 700 

Korean War strategy of, 480-81, 484-85, 
665 

stalemate strategy opposed by, 485, 486, 
489 

Truman’s dismissal of, 484-85 
McCarthy, Eugene, 678 
McCarthy, Joseph, 490, 660 
McCloy,John, 465 

MacDonald, Ramsay, 254, 285, 286, 291, 292 
McGovern, George, 678, 688, 743 
Mackinder, Halford, 814 
Macmillan, Harold, 277, 517, 533, 563 
Anglo-U.S. special relationship and, 596, 
601-2 

background of, 596 

Berlin crisis and, 573, 575, 577, 578-79, 
598-99, 600 

Britain’s declining global role and, 595- 
599 

de Gaulle’s NATO challenge and, 610-12 
Directorate concept and, 610, 612 
Khrushchev visited by, 578-79, 599, 600 
McNamara, Robert, 612, 644, 651, 656 , 658, 
663 

Maddox, 658 
Madison, James, 21, 31 
Maginot Line, 280, 302, 303, 336, 348, 351, 
386 

Mahan, Alfred Thayer, 38 
Mailer, Norman, 710-11 
Maisky, Ivan, 338, 407 
Mai Van Bo, 664 

Malaya, 509, 627, 628, 629, 632, 633, 637, 
641, 652 

Malenkov, Georgi, 504, 505, 509, 510, 519, 
555, 790 
Maleter, Pal, 562 

Manchuria, 249, 286-87, 298, 377, 392, 415- 
416, 449 

Mandate Principle, 239 
manifest destiny, 34, 142, 810 
Manila Formula, 679 
Mansfield, Mike, 639, 654, 672 
Manteuffel, Otto von, 132 
Mao Tse-tung, 645 

Korean intervention and, 479, 482, 483 
personality of, 727 
Snow and, 661, 725 

U.S. opening to China and, 725, 72 6, 727, 
728, 729-30 


Marcos, Ferdinand, 773 
Marcovich, Herbert, 663-64 
Maria Theresa, Archduchess of Austria, 350 
Maritime Conference (1952), 532, 535-36, 
538-40 

Marlborough, John Churchill, Duke of, 99 
Marshall, George C., 262, 403, 444-45, 451— 
454, 487, 490 

Marshall Plan, 258, 424, 444, 451-54, 456, 
457, 469, 473, 494, 558, 649, 650, 809, 
813 

Marx, Karl, 289, 768 

Mary II, Queen of England, 71 

Masaryk, Jan, 457 

“massive retaliation” concept, 574, 612, 6 14, 
632, 634 

“Master Dispatch,” 131-32 
Matsuoka, Yosuke, 365 
Matthews, H. Freeman, 449-50 
Meany, George, 746 
Mediterranean Agreement, 159, 178 
Mein Kampf (Hitler) } 289, 295, 309, 310, 
336, 350, 355, 360, 531 
Merchant, Livingston, 578 
Metternich, Klemens von, 78, 89, 140, 154- 
155, 343 

basic tenets of, 104 
concept of “rights” as seen by, 84-85 
diplomacy of, 82, 86, 87-88, 144 
Holy Alliance and, 83, 85 
international system and, 85 
on Palmerston’s diplomatic style, 101-2 
Russia’s Baltic ambitions and, 91-92 
Wilson compared with, 79, 84 
Metternich system, 82, 85-88, 144 
Austria and, 85-88 

balance-of-power policy and, 166, 397 
Bismarck’s foreign policy and, 121-31, 
146 

collapse of, 102, 103, 105, 131 
U.S. foreign policy and, 166-67 
Mexico, 36, 37, 122, 224, 832 
Middle East: 
borders in, 531 
Churchill on policy for, 524 
detente policy and, 737-40 
Nixon’s diplomacy in, 738, 740 
peace process in, 738-40 
Soviet Union and, 525-26, 737-39, 740 
see also Suez crisis 
Midlothian Campaign, 160-61 
Mikoyan, Anastas I., 554, 556, 560 
Millerand, Alexandre, 253 
Millis, Walter, 378 
Mindszenty,Jozsef, 560, 562 
Mini-Tet Offensive, 678 


897 



Index 


Mission to Moscow (Davies), 430 
Mitterrand, Frangois, 229, 777, 783 
Miyazawa, Kiichi, 827 
Mohammed Reza Shah Pahlavi, 763 
Moldavia, principality of, 94 
Mollet, Guy, 531, 532, 537, 538, 540, 542, 
543, 547 

Molotov, Vyacheslav, 344-45, 356, 366, 419, 
437, 497, 499, 510, 514, 519, 554 
Anglo-Soviet spheres-of-influence 
proposal and, 413-14 
Berlin visit of, 357-63, 428 
Four Policemen concept and, 396-97 
on German declaration of war, 367 
Hitler’s meetings with, 360-62, 363, 434 
Potsdam Conference and, 434, 436 
Washington visit of, 396-97, 398, 407-12 
Moltke, Helmuth von, 204, 205, 216 
Mongolia, 792 
Monroe, James, 35-36 
Monroe Doctrine, 35-39, 235, 812-13 
Europe and, 35-36 
FDR’s invoking of, 383 
Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 281 
as model for League of Nations, 224, 

372 

TR’s corollary to, 39 
Montenegro, 149 

Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat, 
Baron de, 21, 67-68 
moratorium demonstrations, 687-88 
Morgenthau, Hans, 668 
Morgues, Mathieu de, 64-65 
Morocco, 178, 190, 192, 196, 199, 210, 298, 
531,625 

Moscow Summit (1972), 749, 753 
Mossadegh, Muhammad, 523-24 
Most Favored Nation (MFN) status, 753- 
754 

Moyers, Bill, 688 
Multilateral force (MLF), 613 
Munchener Neueste Nachrichten, 1 96 
Munich Conference (1938), 277, 312, 314— 
317, 337, 381-82, 623, 641-42 
Murat, Joachim, 132 
Murphy, Robert, 533 

Mussolini, Benito, 297, 298-99, 300, 313, 
374, 384, 531 

Mutual Assistance, Treaty of, 253-55 
Mutual Assured Destruction (MAD), 750, 
779 

Mutual Balanced Forces Reductions 
(MBFR), 759 

Nagy, Imre, 555, 556, 557, 559, 560, 561, 
562, 567 


Napoleon I, Emperor of France, 31, 74, 75, 
76, 78, 79, 85, 86, 88, 94, 104, 106, 132, 
141,187, 205, 229, 246, 308 
Napoleon III, Emperor of France, 94, 103- 
136, 153, 230 

Austria and, 106, 114-15, 118 
Austro-Prussian War and, 114-15 
Bismarck and, 105, 123-24 
and conflict over Schleswig-Holstein, 
112-14 

domestic policy and, 106-7 
foreign policy of, 107-10, 113, 419-20 
Franco-Prussian War and, 118-19 
German unification and, 104-5, 116-17 
Holy Alliance and, 93, 105 
legacy of, 104-5, 136 
Ottoman Empire and, 92-93 
Piedmont-Austria War and, 110-12 
Polish Revolution and, 109, 110, 112, 113, 
118, 119 

on Prussian and German nationalism, 

114 

Napoleonic Wars, 22, 30, 77, 78, 94, 166, 
169, 220, 221, 222, 237, 250, 251, 314, 
391,399 

Nassau Agreement, 601-2, 614-15 
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 524, 525, 532-33, 542, 
544 

Aswan Dam project and, 528-29 
Baghdad Pact opposed by, 527 
emergence of, 524 
Israel policy of, 527-28 
Maritime Conference proposal rejected 
by, 535-36 

Suez Canal nationalized by, see Suez 
crisis 

national interest: 

Britain’s doctrine of, 95-96 
collective security and, 249, 819-20 
goals vs. tactics and, 706-7, 754-55 
new world order and, 810-11 
realistic assessment of, 711-13, 742, 

768 

Treaty of Versailles and, 248 
U.S. exceptional ism and, 706-7, 731, 
742-43 

nationalism, 19, 82, 87, 94, 104, 111, 128, 
135, 138, 144, 163, 552, 822 
Arab, 523, 524, 530, 532-33, 539 
collapse of communism and, 6 18 
growth of, 784 
Nationalist China, see Taiwan 
National Liberal Party, German, 271 
National Liberation Front (NLF), 669, 679, 
684, 687, 688-89, 690, 697-98 
National Press Club, 475 


898 



Index 


National Security Council, U.S., 588, 650 
Domino Theory memorandum of, 624, 
626-27, 628 
NSC-64 of, 623-24 
NSC-68 of, 462-63, 624, 755 
nation-building concept, 648-50 
Nazi Party, German, 283, 284, 291, 312, 313 
Nazi-Soviet Nonaggression pact, 260, 344- 
347, 350-68, 458 

Anglo-Soviet diplomatic failure and, 347- 
348 

secret protocol of, 347, 351-52, 355, 356, 
359, 362 

Stalin’s revision of, 351-52 
NBC, 672 

Nehru, Jawaharlal, 564 
Nesselrode, Karl Robert, Count, 175 
Netherlands, 37, 57, 69, 71, 97, 407, 677 
neutrality, 30-31, 497-98 
Stalin’s Peace Note and, 501, 571-72 
Neutrality Acts, U.S., 370 
FDR’s proposed circumvention of, 382- 
383 

passage of, 378, 379, 409 
revision of, 385-86, 388 
New Frontier, 644, 645, 668, 677 
New Republic, 768 
News Chronicle (London), 338, 339 
New Statesman, 286 
Newsweek, 581 

new world order, 17-28, 804-35 
Asia in, 25-26, 826-31 
balance of power in, 20-22, 76-77, 810, 
813, 823, 827 

China in, 23-24, 25, 26, 808, 826-31 
collapse of communism in, 18-19, 800, 
814-18 

contradictions and limitations of U.S. 
leadership in, 18-20, 548-49, 804-5, 
809-10, 832-35 

differing perceptions and traits of 
participants in, 26-28, 807-8 
Eastern Europe in, 823-25 
fragmentation vs. globalization in, 23-24 
imposition of U.S. domestic values in, 
17-19, 22-23, 805, 811-13, 832-33 
Japan in, 25-26, 826-30 
Latin America in, 831-32 
NATO in, 818-24 

raison d'etat practitioners in, 24, 810- 
811 

reunified Germany in, 820-22 
Russian Federation in, 23-26, 808, 814- 
818, 822-26 

threats to U.S. leadership in, 813, 823, 
827, 829-30 


unipolarity in, 809 

Wilsonianism and, 804-5, 808-9, 810, 
812,813-14 

New York Times, 421, 517, 645, 655, 660, 
718, 755, 760, 768 
New Zealand, 631, 632, 637 
Ngo Dinh Diem, 636, 637, 639, 649, 667 
Dulles’ support of, 638 
LBJ’s assessment of, 650 
overthrow of, 654-66, 657 
Ngo Dinh Nhu, 654-55 
Nguyen Van Thieu, 654, 686, 688, 690, 691, 
695, 698 

Nicaragua, 593, 774, 787 
Nice, annexation of, 110, 112 
Nicholas I, Tsar of Russia, 85, 94, 100, 106, 
132, 142, 156, 163, 432, 552 
Nicholas II, Tsar of Russia, 174-76, 198, 214, 
215, 414 

Nicholson, Arthur, 199-200 
Nicolson, Harold, 245 

Nixon, Richard M., 41, 54, 124, 358, 514, 604, 
628, 766, 770, 785, 813 
ABM Treaty and, 747-48 
arms control negotiations and, 71 6 
on balance of power, 705 
Cambodia incursions and, 692-93 
Congress and, 745-51 
conservative critics of, 712-13 
detente and foreign policy of, 741-47, 
754-56, 761 
Doctrine of, 707-9 
on Geneva Accords, 634 
Jewish emigration issue and, 753, 754, 
772 

linkage concept and, 715, 717-19 
Mao and, 726, 727 
Middle East diplomacy of, 738, 740 
national interest and foreign policy, 706- 
707, 711-13, 731, 742-43, 754-55, 

768 

opening to China and, see China, U.S. 
opening to 

Peace Movement as interpreted by, 677- 
678, 713 

personality of, 704 
Realpolitik and, 707, 724 
SALT and, 718-19, 748-52, 757 
trade issue and, 755 

on U.S. and anticolonial struggle, 545-46 
U.S. exceptionalism and, 706, 731, 742, 
745 

Vietnam extrication and, 674-75, 677-79, 
681-83, 687, 690-91, 693, 695, 696, 
699, 700 

Vietnamization strategy and, 681-83 


899 



Index 


Nixon, Richard M. ( cont .) 

Watergate scandal and, 696, 731-32, 741- 
742 

Wilsonian ideals and, 704-6, 707, 743 
Nixon Administration, 374, 709, 730, 760- 
761, 766 

detente critics and, 714, 746-47, 737 
European Security Conference and, 758- 
759 

Jewish emigration issue and, 752-53 
linkage approach and, 716-17, 719 
Middle East and, 737, 738 
Ostpolitik and, 735, 736 
Peace Movement and, 675, 688, 744 
SALT and, 718-19, 748-52, 757 
Sino- Soviet relationship as seen by, 721- 
722 

“structure of peace” and, 733, 761 
Vietnam extrication and, 674-76, 678, 
680, 684, 685, 686-87, 689, 692, 695- 
696 

Watergate period and, 756 
“Year of Europe” of, 617-18 
Nixon Doctrine, 707-9 
Noel-Baker, Philip, 285 
Nonaligned group, 526, 539, 540 
Cold War and, 525, 564 
Hungarian uprising and, 562, 563-64 
nonalignment policy, 122-24 
Norris, Kathleen, 389 
North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA), 832 

North Atlantic Cooperation Council 
(NACC), 825 

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 
80, 247, 466, 473, 474, 494, 496, 594, 
625, 626, 637, 649, 784, 818-21 
autonomy question and, 600-606, 610- 
612, 614-16, 618 
balance of power and, 458, 460 
collective security and, 460-61, 545 
colonialism and US. rift with, 525-26, 
545-46 

containment policy and, 456-61 
coupling concept in, 513, 777, 784 
Czech coup and, 457 
Directorate concept and, 610-12 
Eastern Europe countries in, 823-24 
European Security Conference and, 758 
Frances withdrawal from, 611, 612, 6l4, 
735 

Franco-American controversy and, 822- 
823 

French autonomy and, 602-6, 610, 6 14- 
616, 617 

German unification and, 506-7, 735-36 


integration debate and, 612-14, 791 
JFK’s attitude toward, 585-86, 612 
Korean War and, 491 
missile deployment issue and, 775, 776 
Multilateral Force (MLF) and, 613 
in new world order, 818-24 
Ostpolitik and, 735-36 
Partnership for Peace idea and, 824-25 
Senate hearings on, 458-60 
Skybolt affair and, 601-2 
Suez crisis and, 536-37, 544-45, 547, 
548 

Truman Administration and, 457-58 
unified Germany and, 820-21 
US. leadership of, 461-62 
Visegrad countries in, 823-24 
West Germany in, 475, 498, 499, 515-16, 
736 

Wilsonianism of, 457 
Northern Tier concept, 527, 528 
North German Confederation, 117 
Norway, 294, 352, 356, 386, 407 
NSC-64, 623-24 
NSC-68, 462-63, 624, 755 
nuclear weapons: 

Anglo-American partnership and, 601-2 
Berlin crisis and, 573-74, 585, 586 
Cold War and, 461 
decoupling concept and, 513 
deterrence strategy and, 608-9, 610, 614 
Directorate concept and, 610-11 
disengagement plans and, 599-600 
European deployment issue and, 775- 
777 

flexible response strategy and, 609, 612— 
614 

Franco-German cooperation and, 6 17- 
618 

graduated response strategy and, 652 
Kennedy Administration and, 612-13 
military strategy debate and, 607-8 
Nassau Agreement and, 601-2 
non-nuclear challenge and, 608 
Reagan’s attitude toward, 781, 782 
Skybolt affair and, 601-2 
Suez crisis and, 547 
testing of, 715 

US. vs. European approach to, 609- 
610 

on West German soil, 599-600 
Wohlstetter’s article and, 714-15 
see also atomic bomb; Strategic Arms 
Limitation Talks; Strategic Defense 
Initiative 

Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy 
(Kissinger), 588 


900 



Index 


Nye, Gerald, 378 
Nye Report, 378 

Obruchev, Nikolai, 202-3, 206, 215 
Oder-Neisse Line, 734-35, 736 
Olney, Richard, 38 
“open-skies” proposal, 516 
“Opinion on the Eastern Question” 
(Fadeyev), 143-44 
Organization of American States, 831 
Orlando, Vittorio, 231-32 
Osgood, Robert, 780 
Ostpolitik, 514, 584, 734-37 
Berlin Agreement and, 736-37 
Ottoman Empire, 37, 62, 98, 139, 173, 806, 
814 

Anglo-Austrian relationship and, 92, 222 
Balkan crisis (1876) and, 149 
Berlin Memorandum and, 149, 152 
Britain and, 101, 148, 151, 152, 153, 156, 
222 

Napoleon III and, 92-93 
Russia and, 85, 89, 92-93, 98, 108, 122, 
141, 151, 153, 156, 174, 198 
Treaty of San Stefano and, 153-54 

Pacific Community, 826, 828 
Packard, David, 748 
Pact of Bogota, 831 
Paine, Thomas, 32-33 
Pakistan, 527, 548, 564, 627, 637, 726 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO): 
Israel’s agreement (1993) with, 528, 740 
Jordan’s expulsion of, 738-39 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, Lord, 93, 
99, 100, 108, 112, 172, 398, 597, 623, 
763 

balance-of-power approach of, 161, 162, 
167 

Metternich on diplomatic style of, 101-2 
on national interest, 95, 96-97 
Panama, 39 
Panama Canal, 39 
Pan American Union, 383 
Panther Leap, 196-97 
Paris, Congress of, 108, 110, 111 
Paris, Pact of, see Kellogg-Briand Pact 
Paris Peace Accords (1973), 374, 635, 693— 
697 

Paris Peace Conference (1919), 19, 52, 230- 
245, 355 

Bowman memorandum and, 234-35 
collective security doctrine and, 235, 

236 

councils and committees of, 232 
formal guarantees issue and, 237-38 


French position in, 232-38 
League of Nations security provisions 
and, 235-37 
procedures of, 231-32 
representatives to, 230-31 
self-determination principle and, 231, 

232 

U.S. -French negotiations in, 235-37 
Wilson at, 231-32, 234, 235, 236, 805 
Partnership for Peace, 824-25 
Pascal, Blaise, 169 
Pathet Lao, 646 
Paul I, Tsar of Russia, 87 
Paul-Boncour, Joseph, 286 
peaceful coexistence, 260-61 
Churchill’s idea of, 512 
Gorbachev’s notion of, 790 
Rapallo Conference and, 263 
Peace Movement, 675-76 
in France, 677 

as global phenomenon, 675-77 
Nixon Administration and, 675, 688, 

744 

Nixon’s interpretation of, 677-78, 713 
peace negotiations and, 689-91 
U.S. exceptionalism and, 688 
U.S. global mission opposed by, 675-76 
Vietnam War and, 675-76, 677, 682, 688, 
689-91, 692, 695 

Peace Note (Stalin), 493-502, 505, 583, 595, 
764 

Acheson and, 501-2 
Adenauer’s rejection of, 502, 504 
communist ideology and, 496-97 
flexibility and, 497-98 
German unification and, 499-502, 571- 
572 

neutrality and, 501, 571-72 
Stalin’s motivation for, 494-96 
Western response to, 498-501, 516 
Pearl Harbor attack, 370, 392, 393, 399 
Penkovsky, Oleg, 585 
Pensees (Pascal), 169 
Peoples Daily, 479 
“People’s War” manifesto, 644-45 
perestroika, 788, 791, 796-97, 798 
Perestroika (Gorbachev), 788 
Perkins, Frances, 412 
Perle, Richard, 747 
Perry, Matthew, 25-26 
Persian Gulf War, see Gulf War 
Peter I (the Great), Tsar of Russia, 551, 

763, 785 

Pham Van Dong, 660 
Philippines, 374, 401, 480, 637, 773 
Phipps, Eric Clare Edmund, 291 


901 



Index 


Piedmont, 99-100, 103, 110-12 
Piedmont-France -Austria War (Italian War), 
103, 110-12, 119 
Pineau, Christian, 547 
Pinochet Ugarte, Augusto, 773 
Pitt, William (the Younger), 56-77, 83, 86, 
99, 222, 249 
Alexander I and, 75-76 
Pitt Plan, 79, 220, 232 
Atlantic Charter compared with, 391 
Poincare, Raymond, 199-200, 267, 268, 
2^7-78 

Point Four Program, 424 
Poland, 68, 79, 275, 277, 303, 311, 567, 590, 
599, 734, 736, 758, 774, 816, 817, 823, 
824 

Britain’s unilateral guarantee of, 342-44, 
345, 348 

German invasion of, 351, 364, 385 
Germany’s border with, 265, 274, 281- 
282, 296, 313 

Lublin Committee and, 413, 415 
Napoleon III and Revolution of 1863 in, 
109, 110, 112, 113, 118, 119 
post-World War II order and, 406, 407, 
411-15,418 

Russia’s partition of, 75, 143, 144, 207, 
243, 338 

Solidarity’s emergence in, 793, 794 
Soviet occupation of, 352 
in Soviet orbit, 173, 431, 432, 434-35, 
443, 446, 448, 551 
Teheran Conference and, 411-12 
uprising (1956) in, 554-55, 557, 561 
Versailles settlement and, 220, 225, 239, 
243 

at war with Russia, 261 
World War II outbreak and, 336, 337-38, 
340-41, 347, 350, 362, 365 
"Policy of Boldness, A” (Dulles), 553 
Polish Corridor, 239, 261, 264, 273, 307, 
317, 365 

Political Testament (Richelieu), 63, 65 
Polk, James K., 36 
Pompidou, Georges, 683 
Populaire, Le, 547 
Popular Front, 307 

post-Cold War world, 330-31 (map) 
Potemkin, Grigory A., 141 
Potemkin, Vladimir, 337 
Potsdam Conference (1945), 398, 433-37, 
446, 494, 506 
atom bomb and, 435-37 
Berlin administration and, 568 
Cold War and, 433-36 
results of, 435, 436 


Prague, Treaty of, 117 
Pravda, 338, 560, 111 
Priezac, Daniel de, 64 
Provisional Revolutionary Government of 
the Republic of South Vietnam (PRG), 
698 

Prussia, 74, 76, 79-82, 111, 121, 138, 139, 
140, 155, 169, 188, 338, 607 
alliances of, 35, 82, 94 
Austria’s conflicts with, 69, 80, 85, 100, 
107, 113-17, 129, 156 
Bismarck’s foreign policy and, 122-24, 
130-33 

and conflict over Schleswig-Holstein, 
112-14 

Congress of Vienna and, 79, 81, 104 
Crimean War and, 130-33 
France defeated by, 118-19, 148 
German Confederation and, 104, 122 
Junkers of, 183-84, 503 
nonalignment strategy and, 122-23 
Realpolitik and diplomacy of, 122, 125- 
128 

public opinion: 

Balkan crisis and, 160 
British foreign policy and, 100-101, 160- 
161, 213 

in Imperial Germany, 162-63, 182-83 
Imperial Russian policies and, 163 
Kellogg-Briand Pact and, 375-76 
Korean War and, 490 
Napoleon III and, 107 
Vietnam War and, 661, 663, 665-70 
Pugwash Conferences, 663 

Quadripartite Agreement, 593 
Quadruple Alliance, 82-83, 88, 91, 229, 243, 
314 

Quarantine Speech (1937), 379-81, 382, 
383 

Radford, Arthur, 631, 633, 634 
Radio Free Europe, 554, 557-58 
Radio Liberty, 554 

raison d'etat doctrine, 22, 24, 34, 63-67, 
111,113,120,123,806 
de Gaulle’s use of, 576-77 
Frederick II’s use of, 69 
as French foreign policy, 59, 64-67, 71- 
72,74,823 

in new world order, 24, 810-11 
Realpolitik and, 103 
Richelieu and, 58-59, 60, 63-64, 67 
success of, 63, 65, 67 
in U.S. foreign policy, 810 
Wilsonianism and, 66 


902 



Index 


Rajk, Laszlo, 552 
Rakosi, Matyas, 555, 556 
Rapacki, Adam, 513 

Rapallo Conference (1967), 246, 258, 262, 
263-65, 270, 334-35 
Rathenau, Walther, 264, 279 
Reagan, Ronald, 18, 676 , 731, 751, 75 6 , 762- 
802, 813 

Armageddon prophecy and, 781 
balance of power and, 771 
Brezhnev’s correspondence with, 769-70 
character of, 766 

diplomatic style of, 766-67, 771-73 
Eisenhower as precursor of, 631-32 
“evil empire” remark of, 767, 785 
foreign policy doctrine of, 765-66 
human rights policy of, 772-73 
nuclear weapons attitude of, 775, 781, 

782 

personality of, 766 
preconceptions of, 764-65 
qualifications of, 765 
at Reykjavik Summit, 782-83 
rhetoric of, 7 66, 768-69, 771 
SDI proposal of, 778-82 
Soviet Union as perceived by, 768 
U.S. exceptionalism and, 767, 769, 785 
Wilsonianism of, 769, 772-73 
Reagan Administration, 749, 766, 773-74, 
783, 784 

Reagan Doctrine, 774-75 
Realpolitik, 137-67, 294, 298, 348, 495, 564, 
566, 579, 621, 641, 819 
Balkan crisis (1876) and, 148-49 
Bismarck’s practice of, 121, 125-28, 130, 
133, 146, 165, 211 
definition of, 137 
domestic policy and, 131 
geography of Europe and, 137-38 
“Master Dispatch” and, 131-32 
Nixon and, 707, 724 
Prussian diplomacy and, 122, 125-28 
raison d'etat doctrine and, 103 
Soviet practice of, 261, 263 
Stalin and, 335, 405, 407, 417, 428, 452- 
453, 495, 500 
Stresemann and, 271, 273 
Three Emperors’ League (second) and, 
158 

Truman Doctrine and, 452-53 
U.S. rejection of, 221, 431 
war scare of 1875 and, 147-48 
Wilsonian idealism and, 247, 316, 317 
Reformation, 57-58, 61 
Reichstag, German, 135, 149, 155, 162-63, 
165, 283 


Reinsurance Treaty, 164, 175, 179-80, 181 
Renfield, Richard, 667 
reparations, 264, 268 
Britain and, 256-58, 434 
Dawes Plan and, 272, 282-83 
France and, 256-58, 262 
Potsdam Conference and, 434, 435 
Stresemann and, 272-73 
Treaty of Versailles and, 256-58, 262-63, 
267 

Weimar Germany and, 257-58, 272, 284- 
285 

Republican Party, U.S., 44, 679, 743 
Restitution, Edict of (1629), 61 
Reston, James, 645, 667 
revanche , 138, 228 

Revolution of 1848, 104, 105, 120, 144, 156 
Reykjavik Summit (1986), 782-83 
Rheinisch-Westfalische Zeitung, 196 
Rhineland, 80, 267, 281, 285, 298, 313, 372, 
378 

France and demilitarization of, 229, 233, 
237, 251,268, 274, 278, 280 
German reoccupation of, 300-304, 306, 
364 

Rhodes, Cecil, 184 

Ribbentrop, Joachim von, 346, 347, 357, 
359-60, 361, 362-63, 367, 408, 419-20 
Richardson, Elliot, 723-24 
Richelieu, Armand Jean du Plessis, due de, 
17, 22, 56-77, 108, 112, 117, 124, 126, 
187, 199, 308 

on basic principles of foreign policy, 621 
Edict of Restitution issued by, 61 
Grace of Alais granted by, 61-62 
Habsburg threat and, 59-65, 70, 122, 123, 
189-90 

legacy of, 80, 81, 85 

raison d'etat principle grafted by, 58-59, 
60, 63-64, 67 
Ridgway, Matthew, 488 
Rietzler, Kurt, 184 
Rio Pact, 458, 831 
Road to War , The (Millis), 378 
Rockefeller, Nelson, 516, 721 
Rogers, William P., 723, 738 
Rokossovsky, Konstantin, 554 
“Rolling Thunder” campaign, 658 
Romania, 219, 311, 340-41, 342, 356, 362, 
413, 567 

France and, 120, 296 
Soviet domination of, 408, 409, 434, 435, 
437, 443, 446 

Soviet Union’s Bessarabia dispute with, 
336, 347, 355 

Roon, Albrecht Theodor Emil von, 136 


903 



Index 


Roosevelt, Franklin D., 18, 76, 175, 315, 
369-93, 394-422, 473, 499, 676, 741, 
805, 813, 831 

ABC-1 Agreement and, 389, 403-4 
aggressor nations identified by, 373, 384 
Atlantic Charter and, 390-91, 401 
Bering Strait meeting proposed by, 410 
on British vs. U.S. interests, 395-96, 400- 
401,421 

at Casablanca Conference, 405 
character of, 371 

Charlottesville speech of, 386-87 
colonialism issue and, 402, 408 
death of, 423 

destroyers-for-bases deal and, 387-88 
Four Freedoms proclaimed by, 389, 

390 

Four Policemen concept of, see Four 
Policemen concept 
on Germany-first strategy, 403-4 
Greer incident and, 392, 659 
Indochina attitude of, 625 
Lend-Lease Act and, 388 
Monroe Doctrine invoked by, 383 
Munich Agreement and, 314, 381-82 
post-World War II order and, 395-96, 
399, 400-401, 405-10, 422 
Quarantine Speech of, 379-81, 382, 383 
revision of Neutrality Acts and, 385 
Stalin as characterized by, 417 
at Teheran Conference, 410, 411 
in U.S.-Japanese negotiations, 392 
wartime diplomacy and strategy of, 394- 
422 

at Yalta Conference, 396, 410, 414-16, 
420 

Roosevelt, Theodore, 45, 50, 72, 162, 389, 
704, 705, 712, 731, 767 
global view of, 38-41 
Imperial Germany as seen by, 41, 42-43 
on League of Nations, 53-54 
Monroe Doctrine “corollary” of, 39 
Nobel Peace Prize awarded to, 42 
Russo-Japanese relationship as seen by, 
41-42, 49 

Rostow, Walt, 650-51 
Royal Air Force, British, 295, 354 
Royal Navy, British, 36, 38, 42, 93, 98, 148, 
149, 251,384, 386 
Ruhr crisis, 229, 267-69, 272, 372 
Runciman, Walter, Lord, 311 
Rusk, Dean, 584, 586, 624, 655 
Russia, Imperial, 132, 138-46, 165, 169, 183, 
193, 197, 202-16, 221, 227 
Algeciras Conference and, 190-91 
Anglo-Russian Entente and, 191-92 


Asiatic Department of, 174 
Austria’s Balkan conflict with, 138-39, 
144, 146-47, 159-60 
Austria’s rivalry with, 86, 87, 93-94, 99, 
146-47, 153, 173, 199 
autocratic system and foreign policy of, 
75,175 

Balkans and, 85, 91-92, 93, 94, 148, 149, 
152-54, 162, 178, 199-200 
Bosnia-Herzegovina crisis (1908) and, 
195, 196 

Britain and, 89, 98, 100, 142, 151, 171, 
188, 191-92 

Bulgarian crisis and, 163-64 
Congress of Berlin and, 155-57, 158 
Congress of Vienna and, 79 
Crimean War and, 93, 108 
demise of, 221 
dual nature of, 173-74 
eighteenth-century development of, 74- 
75 

Entente Cordiale and, 181, 188, 728 
exceptionalism of, 142-44 
expansionism of, 24-25, 100, 139-47, 
151-52, 156, 159-60, 172-75, 176, 551 
in Holy Alliance, 35, 82, 119, 121, 124 
India and, 100, 140, 142, 145, 151, 172 
Japan’s rivalry with, 41-42 
Japan’s (1905) war with, 173-76, 190, 
192,194, 195,196,214, 416 
Ottoman Empire and, 85, 89, 92-93, 98, 
108, 122, 141, 151, 153, 156, 174, 198 
Paris Peace Conference and, 231 
Poland partitioned by, 75, 143, 144, 207, 
243, 338 

Polish Revolution (1863) and, 110, 112, 
113, 118 

post-Versailles position of, 242-43 
public opinion and foreign policy of, 163 
in Quadruple Alliance, 82 
Reinsurance Treaty and, 164, 180, 189 
Sweden and, 74-75 

Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and, 220, 227, 241, 
257, 258-60 

World War I outbreak and, 202-3, 206-8, 
210-11, 214, 215-16, 348-49 
Russian Federation, 173, 814-18 
Atlantic nations and, 825-26 
former Soviet republics and, 815-16, 818 
independence of, 798-99 
nationalism in, 817 
“near abroad” and, 815-16 
new Europe and, 618-19 
new world order and, 23-26, 808, 814- 
818, 822-26 

U.S. policy toward, 271-72, 817-18 


904 



Index 


Russian Revolution, 227, 259, 336, 337 
Russo-Finnish War, 352 
Russo-Japanese War, 173-76, 190, 192, 194, 
195,196, 214, 416 
Russo-Polish War, 26l, 262 

Saar, 229, 278 

Sadat, Anwar, 284, 526, 528, 533, 547, 739 
St. Germain, Treaty of, 310 
Sakhalin Island, 363, 415 
Salisbury, Harrison, 660 
Salisbury, Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne- 
Cecil, Lord, 100, 153, 154, 158, 175, 
177-78, 183, 184, 186-87 
Samoa, 185 
Samuel, Herbert, 295 
San Antonio Formula, 664-65, 669, 670 
San Stefano, Treaty of, 153-54 
Sardinia, 119-20, 132 
see also Piedmont 
Savoy, 71, 110, 112, 203 
Saxony, 69, 71, 81, 268 
Sazonov, Sergei, 198, 210, 212, 215 
Schacht, Hjalmar, 307 
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr., 409 
Schleswig-Holstein, 103, 112-14, 117, 163 
Schlieffen, Alfred von, 204-5 
Schlieffen Plan, 204-6, 216 
Schmidt, Helmut, 775, 776 
Schnurre, Karl, 345 

Schulenburg, Friedrich von der, 345, 346, 
366, 367 

Schurman, Jacob, 49 
Schuschnigg, Kurt von, 358 
Schwarzenberg, Felix, Furst zu, 106 
Scioppius, Caspar, 61 
second front strategy, 403, 404-5 
Security Council, U.N., 249, 460, 477, 478, 
540, 541, 542, 557, 562 
Seeckt, Hans von, 261-62, 272 
self-determination principle, 240, 244, 317, 
406 

Paris Peace Conference and, 231, 232 
Wilsonian design and, 221-22, 225, 229, 
239 

Senate, U.S., 37, 227, 236, 485, 648 
ABM Treaty and, 747 
China lobby of, 479, 741 
Four-Power Treaty and, 373-74 
Kellogg-Briand Pact endorsed by, 375 
NATO hearings of, 458-60 
Tonkin Gulf Resolution and, 658 
Treaty of Versailles and, 238, 251 
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 281, 
412, 458-60, 650, 746 

Senate Subcommittee on Arms Control, 746 


Serbia, 194, 195, 196, 199, 203, 209, 210-16, 
240, 348 

Seven Years’ War, 68, 69, 75, 140, 423 
Seward, William Henry, 37 
Shanghai Communique, 727-29 
Shaw, George Bernard, 22 
Shepilov, Dmitri T., 519, 529, 542 
Shevardnadze, Eduard, 798, 801 
Shultz, George, 718, 755, 774, 783 
Shuvalov, Count Peter, 149, 152, 153, 154, 
157 

Sihanouk, Norodom, 647 
Silesia, 69, 80, 112, 130 
Simon, John, 291 
Singapore, 285, 628, 637 
Sino-Soviet rift: 

Adenauer’s view of, 588-89, 720 
de Gaulle’s view of, 720 
diplomatic flexibility and, 704 
Eisenhower’s assessment of, 509 
France and, 720 

Gorbachev’s overtures and, 791-93 
Korean War and, 483, 488, 491 
Nixon Administration’s perception of, 
721-22 

Taiwan and, 722 

U.S. opening to China and, 713-14, 719- 
725, 728, 730-31 
Skybolt affair, 601-2, 61 4 
Slansky, Rudolf, 552 
Slovakia, 57, 316, 816, 817, 823, 824 
Small Holders’ Party, Hungarian, 560 
Smith, Adam, 21 
Snow, Edgar, 661, 725 
Social Democratic Party, German, 183, 498, 
503-4, 572, 775, 776 
“Socialism on the Defensive” (Halliday), 
800 

Solferino, battle of, 111 
Solidarity, 793, 794 
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr, 754, 815 
Somalia, 809 

Sonnenfeldt, Helmut, 759 
Sonnino, Sidney, 231 

“Sources of Soviet Conduct, The” (Kennan), 
454-55 

Southeast Asian Treaty Organization 
(SEATO), 637, 645 

Soviet Union, 22, 23, 86, 199, 308, 311, 336- 
337, 340, 398, 406, 407, 566-67, 618, 
808 

ABM Treaty and, 749 
Acheson on U.S. relations with, 501-2, 
509, 553, 755 

Afghanistan invaded by, 141, 701, 763, 
773, 774, 787, 792 


905 



Index 


Soviet Union ( cont .) 

arms race and economic pressures in, 
790 

Aswan Dam project and, 529 
Atlantic Charter violations proposed by, 
406 

atomic bomb propaganda of, 441-42 
August coup in, 786 
Baltic states and, 347, 352, 355, 798 
British unilateral guarantees and, 344, 
347-48 

Bulgaria in orbit of, 435, 437, 443, 446, 
448, 451 

Chamberlain’s distrust of, 341-42 
China and, see Sino-Soviet rift 
Churchill’s spheres-of-influence 
arrangement and, 413-14 
coexistence principle and, 260-61 
collapse of, 18-19, 173, 176, 455, 701, 
760, 774, 785-86, 791-99, 806, 820 
collective security and foreign policy of, 
336, 338-39, 340 

Czechoslovakian intervention of, 249, 
476, 624, 704, 716, 734 
Decree on Peace of, 259 
early foreign policy of, 258-61 
Eastern European orbit of, see Eastern 
Europe 

Egypt and, 525-26, 738, 739, 753 
European Security Conference and, 758- 
759 

as “evil empire,” 767, 785 
excluded from Versailles settlement, 259 
exit tax levied by, 753, 754 
expansionism of, 141, 144, 249, 352, 409, 
449-51, 476, 542, 543, 554-55, 560-62, 
620, 624, 701, 704, 716, 728, 734, 763- 
764, 773, 774, 787, 792 
Finland invaded by, 352 
Franco-Soviet Agreement (1935) and, 
296-97, 302, 336 
Geneva Summit and, 519 
German invasion of, 391, 394, 399 
Germany’s declaration of war on, 367-68 
Germany’s rapprochement with, 262, 
263-65, 267, 270, 282, 355-56 
glasnost and, 796-97, 798 
Gorbachev’s liberalization policy and, 
793-95 

Hitler-Molotov meetings and, 360-62, 

364 

in Hitler’s long-range plans, 309-10 
Hungarian uprising suppressed by, 542, 
543, 560-62 

Indochina conflict and, 624, 627, 634, 

635, 720 


Japan’s nonaggression pact with, 365-66 
Japan’s war with, see Russo-Japanese war 
Jewish emigration from, 752-54, 757 
Joint Declaration violated by, 418 
Kennan’s Long Telegram and, 443, 447- 
449, 454 

in Kennan’s “X” article, 454-55 
Korean War and, 249, 477, 478, 483, 487, 
488, 491-92, 495, 498 
League of Nations and, 249, 250, 335— 
336 

Lenin on foreign policy of, 261 
linkage concept and, 716-17 
Marshall Plan reaction of, 453, 457 
in Matthews memorandum, 449-51 
Middle East and, 525-26, 737-39, 740 
missile deployment issue and, 776-77 
Most Favored Nation status and, 753-54 
Munich Agreement and, 333, 337-38 
perestroika and, 788-90 
Poland occupied by, 352 
Poland’s uprising (1956) and, 554-55 
post-World War I order and, 229, 231, 
252 

post-World War II order and, 395, 398- 
399, 406, 407-9, 420-21 
Quadripartite Agreement and, 593 
Rapallo Conference and, 262-65 
Reagan’s perception of, 768, 770-71 
Realpolitik and, 261, 263 
regional autonomy and, 797-98 
Romania dominated by, 405, 409, 434, 
435, 437, 443, 446 

Romania’s Bessarabia dispute with, 336, 
340-41,347,355 
Russo-Polish War and, 261 
SDI and, 778, 779, 782, 787 
separate peace proposal and, 419-20 
Sino-American cooperation and, 719-21, 
723-24, 713-14, 728, 730-31 
Sputnik launched by, 570 
Stalin and post-World War II diplomacy 
of, 427-30, 438-41 

Stalin’s death and, 494, 504, 506, 507, 509, 
520 

Stalin’s Peace Note and, 497-98, 571-72 
Stalin’s purges and, 337, 338-39, 341 
Suez crisis and, 522-23, 525, 526, 529, 
537-38, 539, 542-43, 546-47, 548 
Titoist threat and, 552-53 
in Treaty of Brest-Litovsk negotiations, 
258-59 

Treaty of Mutual Assistance and, 254 
Tripartite Pact and, 356-57, 364 
unilateral force reductions by, 791-92 
U.S. trade with, 753-55 


906 



Index 


Vietnam War and, 624, 627, 634, 635, 681, 
698 

wars of national liberation and, 593, 644 
World War I outbreak and, 348-49 
World War II casualties of, 438 
Yalta’s Joint Declaration violated by, 418 
Yugoslavia’s treaty with, 366 
see also arms control; Berlin crisis; Cold 
War; containment policy; detente 
policy; Helsinki Accords; human rights; 
Hungarian Revolution; Russian 
Federation; Strategic Arms Limitation 
Talks 

Spain, 31, 33, 57, 59, 60, 66, 68, 69, 71, 74, 
92, 193, 308 
Spanish Civil War, 307 
Spanish Netherlands, 59, 71 
Spanish Succession, Wars of, 251 
spheres of influence, 40 
Churchill’s proposed arrangement of, 
413-14 

in Cold War, 328-29 (map) 
containment policy and, 447, 456 
Gorbachev’s renunciation of, 794 
“splendid isolation” doctrine, 97, 139, 145, 
157, 167, 176-77, 178, 183, 185-86, 
189, 376 

SS-20 missiles, 775, 777, 801 
Stalin, Joseph, 259, 296-97, 332-49, 354- 
355, 392, 394-422, 435-36, 477, 511, 
515, 521, 523, 736, 737, 805, 813 
balance of power defined by, 398 
Berlin blockade and, 569 
Berlin occupation and, 417-18 
Churchill’s spheres-of-influence 
arrangement and, 413-14 
communism as reconsecrated by, 496-97 
death of, 494, 504, 506, 509, 713 
Eastern European security belt and, 173, 
443-44, 446, 447, 495, 551, 552; 594- 
595 

Eighteenth Party Congress Address of, 
338-39, 340 

Eisenhower’s Berlin correspondence 
with, 417-18 

FDR’s characterization of, 417 
Five-Year Plan speech of, 441, 443 
Four Policemen concept and, 411 
Germany’s declaration of war and, 367- 
368 

Harriman’s assessment of, 428 
Hitler and, 332-35, 336, 346-47, 355, 
357-58, 364, 368 
Hopkins’ talks with, 431-32, 444 
Japanese nonaggression treaty and, 365- 
366 


on Kellogg-Briand Pact, 334 
Khrushchev’s denunciation of, 552, 555, 
704 

Korean War and, 476, 478, 483, 492, 495, 
498, 500 

Lublin Committee and, 413, 415 
and Marshall Plan, 444-45, 453 
misjudgment of, 336, 339-40, 343-44, 
412 

Munich Agreement and, 337-38 
Nazi-Soviet Pact negotiations and, 344-47 
Peace Note of, see Peace Note 
post-World War II order and, 395, 398- 
400, 406-8, 409, 410 
at Potsdam Conference, 433-36 
purges by, 316, 337, 338-39, 341, 438, 
499-500, 505, 552, 554 
Realpolitik and, 335, 405, 406, 417, 428, 
452-53, 495, 500 
Ribbentrop and, 347, 357 
Russo-Finnish War and, 352 
second front strategy and, 404-5 
secret protocol revised by, 350-52 
separate peace proposal and, 419 
Soviet-Japanese nonaggression pact and, 
365-66 

Soviet post-World War II diplomacy and, 
427-30, 438-41 

Soviet strategy described by, 334-35 
successors to, 504-5, 519, 764 
at Teheran Conference, 410, 411, 421 
Tripartite Pact and, 356-57 
unconditional surrender favored by, 398, 
405 

US. Realpolitik as viewed by, 500-501 
wartime diplomacy and strategy of, 394- 
422 

and war with Japan, 415-16 
at Yalta Conference, 396, 410, 414-16 
Stalingrad, Battle of, 394-95, 399, 403, 404, 
405,411,419 

State Department, U.S., 433, 454, 588, 592, 
650, 652, 783 

Hungarian uprising and, 562-63 
Indochina program of, 626 
Matthews memorandum and, 449-50 
NATO concept defended by, 458-59 
Stern-Rubarth, Edgar, 283 
Stettinius, Edward R., 437 
Stevenson Amendment, 754 
Stimson, Henry L, 375-76, 377 
Stoessel, Walter, 726 
Stolypin, Peter, 176 

Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), 
748-52, 757 
detente and, 749-52 


907 



Index 


Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (cont.) 
Nixon and, 718-19 
signing of, 749 

U.S. domestic debate on, 749-52 
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), 765, 775, 
778, 782, 787 
critics of, 779-81 

Mutual Assured Destruction and, 779 
Reykjavik Summit and, 783, 790-91 
Stresa Conference, 297-98, 299, 301 
Stresemann, Gustav, 266-87, 290, 310 
background and personality of, 271 
Briand’s meetings with, 278-79 
death of, 283 

fulfillment policy of, 269, 271-72, 273, 
276 

German-Polish border issue and, 274 
Locarno Pact and, 274, 277 
Nobel Prize awarded to, 274 
Realpolitik and, 271, 283 
reparations issue and, 272-73 
Soviet diplomacy of, 282 
Sudan, 185, 528 
Sudetenland, 311,313, 317 
Suez crisis, 521, 522-49, 559, 596, 606, 631 
Adenauer on outcome of, 547 
aftermath of, 546-49 
Anglo-French expedition and, 540-44 
Anglo-U.S. -French rift and, 524-25, 532— 
535, 537-39 
appeasement and, 531 
Arab nationalism and, 523, 524, 530, 532— 
533, 539 

Aswan Dam project and, 528-30 
colonization issue and, 524-25, 545-46 
consequences of, 547-49 
containment policy and, 525-26, 527, 
537,545 

Dulles and, 532, 533-39, 540 
Eden and, 528-44, 547, 595 
European unity and, 547-48 
Hungarian Revolution and, 565-66 
Maritime Conference proposal and, 532, 
535-36, 538-40 . 

nationalization of canal and, 530 
NATO and, 536-37, 544-45, 547, 548 
Nonaligned group and, 526, 546 
Northern Tier concept and, 527, 528 
nuclear weapons and, 547 
U.N. and, 539-42, 544, 549 
Users’ Association proposal and, 537 
suffrage, universal, 120-21, 135, 150, 162 
Supreme Military Council, Soviet, 339 
Suslov, Mikhail, 556, 560 
Sweden, 37, 59, 60, 68, 69, 71, 74-75, 352, 
362, 590 


Switzerland, 311, 551, 590 

Syria, 147, 384, 527, 546, 713, 737, 739 

Taft, Robert A., 388-89 
Taft, William Howard, 44 
Taiwan, 479, 529, 625, 638, 722 
Talleyrand, Charles de, 78-79, 82, 86, 94 
Tardieu, Andre, 233-34, 238, 256 
Taussig, Charles, 402 
Taylor, A. J. P.,347 
Taylor, Maxwell, 650-51, 660 
Teheran Conference (1943), 410-13, 424, 
426 

Tet Offensive, 656, 665, 670-71, 672 
Thailand, 624, 628, 632, 637, 645, 647, 650 
Thatcher, Margaret, 150, 596, 783, 784 
Thiers, Adolphe, 116-17 
Thieu, Nguyen Van, see Nguyen Van Thieu 
Thirty Years’ War, 21, 59, 62, 65, 68, 80, 169, 
806, 807 

Tho, Le Due, see Le Due Tho 
Thompson, Llewellyn, 562, 570, 575, 586 
Three Emperors’ League (first), 146-49, 
151,153,157 

Balkan crisis (1876) and, 148-49 
Berlin memorandum and, 149 
Three Emperors’ League (second), 158-59, 
163-64, 165, 195 
Thurmond, Strom, 469 
Tiananmen Square demonstrations, 792-93 
Time, 529, 672, 705, 790, 799 
Times (London), 286 
Tisza, Stephen, 211 
Tito, Marshal (Josip Broz), 552, 629 
Titulescu, Nicolae, 306 
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 556 
Tonkin Gulf Resolution, 658-59 
Tory Party, British, 73, 100, 150, 177 ; see also 
Conservative Party, British 
Tracy, Benjamin, 38 

Treatise on the Economic Consequences of 
the Peace (Keynes), 257 
triangular diplomacy, see China, U.S. 
opening to; linkage concept; Nixon, 
Richard M.; Sino-Soviet rift 
Trianon, Treaty of, 310 
Tripartite Pact, 356, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 
364, 365 

Triple Alliance, 159, 178, 180, 186, 203 
Triple Entente, 42, 50, 148, 182, 191-93, 
200, 201,210,212, 261-62, 341 
Troppau, Congress of, 90, 91, 149 
Trotsky, Leon, 258-60 
Truman, Harry S., 429, 467, 495, 499, 501, 
509, 524, 612, 622, 665, 741, 805 
background and character of, 424-25 


908 



Index 


balance of power rejected by, 446-47 
Byrnes’ falling out with, 438 
collective security commitment of, 426- 
427 

Four Policemen concept and, 426-27 
“get-tough” policy of, 446 
Greek-Turkish aid and, 451 
Indochina conflict and, 625-26, 628, 

649 

Kissinger’s meeting with, 425 
Korean conflict and, 474, 477, 479, 480- 
487, 490-91 

MacArthur dismissed by, 484-85 
at Potsdam Conference, 433-36 
presidency as viewed by, 425 
U.S.-Soviet relations and, 425-27 
Wallace’s conflict with, 468-69 
Wilsonianism of, 447 

Truman Administration, 469, 479, 481, 483, 
487, 489, 490, 501 
Indochina conflict and, 625-27 
NATO and, 457-48 
Truman Doctrine, 452-53 
Trusteeship Council, U.N., 408 
Tucker, Richard, 34 
Tunisia, 159, 625 

Turkey, 340, 362, 449, 524, 527, 548, 620, 
627, 815 

Anglo-U.S. aid to, 451-52, 469 
Imperial, see Ottoman Empire 
Korean War and, 478 
see also Greek-Turkish aid program 

U-2 spy plane incident, 582 
Ukraine, 75, 207, 220, 259, 261, 419, 815 
unconditional surrender policy, 398, 

405 

“unipolar” world, 809 
United Action proposal, 631-34, 648 
United Nations, 18, 53, 54, 154, 414, 416, 
427, 447, 449, 452, 469, 499, 579, 586, 
625, 631, 720, 759, 808, 815, 818 
General Assembly of, 249, 478, 542, 562 
Gorbachev’s speech to, 791, 792 
Hungarian uprising and, 557, 559, 561, 
562, 563 

Korean War onset and, 249, 477, 478 
in post-Cold War era, 249-50 
Security Council of, 249, 460, 477, 478, 
540, 541, 542, 557, 562 
Suez crisis and, 539-42, 544, 549 
Trusteeship Council of, 408 
United States: 

alliances of, 247; see also collective 
security 

anticolonial tradition of, 625-26 


contradictions and limitations in 
leadership of, 18-20, 548-49, 804-5, 
809-10, 832-35 

exceptionalism of, see exceptionalism, 
U.S. 

expansionism of, 30-31, 36-37; see also 
Monroe Doctrine 

imposition of domestic values of, 17-19, 
22-23, 805, 811-13, 832-33 
moral precepts of, 33-34, 221-23 
threats to global leadership of, 813, 823, 
827, 829-30 

universal suffrage, 120-21, 135, 150, 162 
Unkiar Skelessi, Treaty of, 173 
Upper Silesia, 239, 252, 261 
Urban VIII, Pope, 58 
Users’ Association, 536-37, 540, 577 

Vance, Cyrus, 684, 719 
Vandenberg, Arthur, 385, 389, 451-52 
Varga, Yevgenii, 496 
Vattel, Emmerich de, 68 
Venetia, 115 

Verona, Congress of, 90, 149, 155 
Versailles, Treaty of, 83, 218-45, 268, 307, 
344, 806 

Anglo-French split after, 246, 250-55, 
258, 265 

Anschluss and, 310 
Article 116 of, 262-63 
Article 231 of, 245, 257 
Belgium and, 239, 274, 301 
collective security doctrine and, 221, 222, 
227, 232, 235, 253-54 
disarmament provisions of, 244, 255-56, 
285 

economic penalties of, 239-40 
Foch’s comment on, 250 
Fourteen Points and, 229-30 
Franco-German relationship and, 242-43 
German reoccupation of Rhineland and, 
301, 305, 306 

Locarno Pact’s undermining of, 274-7 6, 
278-79, 283-84, 306, 307 
Mandate Principle and, 239 
military restrictions of, 239 
national interests and, 248 
psychological blight of, 243-45 
punitive terms of, 229-30, 239-40, 242- 
243, 245, 372 

reparations issue and, 256-58, 262-63, 
267 

rise of Hitler and, 289, 290, 297 
Russo-German rapprochement and, 246, 
264-65 

Soviets excluded from, 259 


909 



Index 


Versailles, Treaty of (cont.) 
states created by, 240-41 
Stresa Conference and, 297 
terms of, 239-40 

Treaty of Mutual Assistance and, 233-35 
U.S. nonratification of, 238, 241-42 
"war guilt clause” of, 245, 257 
weaknesses of, 81, 242-45 
Vershinin, Konstantin, 439 
Victor Emmanuel, King of Italy, 300 
Victoria, Queen of England, 97, 149 
Vienna, Congress of, 22, 77-85, 102, 128, 
140, 228, 237, 240, 246, 806, 811 
Alexander I and, 79, 83 
balance of power and, 79 
Congress system and, 82 
Europe after, 324-25 (map) 

German Confederation created by, 80- 
81, 85 

Holy Alliance and, 82-84 
Quadruple Alliance and, 82-83, 229 
world order created by, 242, 244 
Vienna Summit (1961), 645 
Vietcong, 644, 652, 668, 670 
Vietminh, 625 
Vietnam, 57, 479, 625, 827 
Cambodia invaded by, 637, 773 
China and, 627 
partition of, 634-35 

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of (North), 
608, 624, 635, 644, 660 
American domestic debate exploited by, 
665 

China’s support of, 630 
Laotian neutrality violated by, 645-47 
peace negotiations and, 678-79, 684-85, 
688-89, 697-98 
Politburo of, 656, 663, 684 
reunification and, 697-98 
Vietnam, Republic of (South), 644, 660 
democracy in, 637, 639, 653-56 
guerrilla warfare and, 639-41 
nation-building concept and, 648-49 
peace negotiations and, 684, 688, 689, 
691, 695, 696-97 
PRG of, 698 

reunification and, 697-98 
U.S. Military Advisor Group in, 639 
Vietnamization strategy and, 681-83, 684 
Vietnam War, 403, 469, 477, 549, 643-73, 

674- 702, 708, 713, 743, 744, 763 
aftermath of, 699-702 

American values and, 620-21, 662, 667, 

675- 76 

bombing halted in, 672-73, 693 
Buddhist protests and, 654-55 


Cambodia and, 641, 645-46, 686, 692-93 
China and, 630, 634, 635, 644-45, 660- 
661, 681 

Diem overthrow and, 654-66 
DM2 and, 645 
Dong’s assessment of, 660 
escalation of, 651-52, 653, 656 
“forward strategy” and, 681 
guerrilla warfare in, 639-41, 645, 649, 
652, 660-61 

Ho Chi Minh Trail and, 641 , 646, 660, 680, 
693, 696 

JFK’s policies and, 643-44, 645, 649-54 
Johnson Administration and, 656-57 
Kissinger's role in U.S. extrication from, 
663-64, 677-78, 680, 682-84, 686-87, 
691-92, 695 

Korean War contrasted with, 490, 659-60, 
665 

Laotian neutrality violated in, 645-47 
LBJ on U.S. goals in, 661-62 
LBJ’s Saigon mission and, 649-50 
legitimacy principle and, 655 
lessons of, 659-60, 699-701 
Lippmann’s criticism of, 665-66 
Manila Formula and, 679 
media and, 654, 667-68, 671-72, 699 
military vs. political objectives in, 659-61 
Mini-Tet Offensive in, 678 
Moratorium demonstrations and, 687-88 
nation-building concept and, 648-49, 650 
Peace Movement and, 675-676, 677, 682, 
688, 689-91, 692, 695 
peace negotiations in, 661-63, 665, 683- 
687; see also Paris Peace Accords 
“Rolling Thunder’' campaign in, 658 
San Antonio Formula and, 664-65, 669, 
670 

SEATO and, 64 5-46 

Soviet Union and, 624, 627, 634, 635, 681, 

698 

surrogate nature of, 624-25 
Tet Offensive in, 656, 665, 670-71, 672 
Tonkin Gulf Resolution and, 658-59 
unilateral withdrawal issue and, 678-80, 
689-90 

U.S. domestic debate and, 661, 663, 665- 
675, 678-79, 685, 689, 692, 695, 697 
U.S. exceptionalism and, 621, 668, 676, 
688 

U.S. global mission and, 675-76 
U.S. militarv establishment in, 639, 640- 
641, 653 

Vietnamization strategy and, 681-83, 

684 

Wilsonian ideals and, 653-54, 658, 698 


910 



Index 


see also Domino Theory; Indochina 
conflict 

Volkogonov, Dmitri, 364 

Voltaire (Frangois-Marie Arouet), 67, 86 

Vyshinsky, Andrei, 366-67 

Waging Peace (Eisenhower), 64 1 
Walesa, Lech, 759 
Walewski, Alexandre, 1 14 
Wallace, Henry, 447, 464, 467-70, 824 
Wallace Movement, 470, 710 
Wallachia, principality of, 94 
Wall Street Journal, 671-72 
Walpole, Robert, 100 
Walsh, Thomas J., 281 
Walters, Vernon, 685 
War of 1812, 35 
War of 1859, 103, 110-12, 119 
Warsaw Pact, 447, 555, 557, 558, 560, 561, 
567, 792, 795 

Washington, George, 32, 48-49, 389 
Washington Naval Conference (1921-22), 
373 

Washington Naval Treaty (1922), 377, 380 
Washington Post , 718, 755 
Watergate scandal, 696, 698, 731-32, 739, 
741-42, 756 

Wealth of Nations, The (Smith), 21 
Webster, Charles, 240 
Weimar Republic, see Germany, Weimar 
Welles, Sumner, 386, 402 
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of, 86 
Weltpolitik, 171, 183, 193, 220, 503 
Western Hemisphere Defense system, 390 
Westmoreland, William C., 670 
Westphalia, Peace of, 21, 27, 65, 68, 76, 139, 
290, 806 

Whig Party, British, 72-73, 100 
William I, Emperor of Germany, 118, 170 
William II, Emperor of Germany, 49, 188, 
190, 196, 198 

Bismarck compared with, 210 
Bismarck dismissed by, 170-71 
Churchill’s description of, 171 
Gladstone and, 182 
Kruger Telegram and, 184-85 
Reinsurance Treaty and, 179-80 
World War I outbreak and, 209-10, 211, 
214-16 

William III, King of England, 56-77, 99, 266, 
810 

Willkie, Wendell, 388 
Wilson, Henry, 706 

Wilson, Woodrow, 18, 22, 29-55, 74, 390, 
704, 705, 741, 743, 767, 808-9 
balance of power condemned by, 226 


collective security concept and, 51-53, 
91,221-23, 248, 408, 809 
declaration of war sought by, 48-50, 450 
Fourteen Points of, see Fourteen Points 
Gladstone compared with, 160-62 
global view of, 46-48 
idealistic view of, 225-27 
isolationism and, 44, 45-46 
League of Nations as envisioned by, 30, 
51, 223-24, 234-35 
legacy of, 247 

Lloyd George’s memorandum to, 241 
Mandate Principle and, 239 
Metternich compared with, 79, 84 
Nixon s admiration for, 706 
at Paris Peace Conference, 230, 231-32, 
234, 235, 236, 805 

punitive provisions of Versailles Treaty 
and, 229, 245 
TR contrasted with, 44 
Wilsonianism, 244, 704, 808-9, 823, 826 
Alexander I as precursor of, 75 
Atlantic Charter and, 391 
Britain and, 248-49 
detente policy and, 743 
Gorbachev’s use of, 789 
Hitler and, 317 
isolationism and, 44, 45-46 
JFK’s Declaration of Interdependence 
and, 613-14 
NATO and, 457 

new world order and, 804-5, 808-9, 810, 
812,813-14 

Nixon and, 704-6, 707, 743 
raison d'etat doctrine and, 66 
Reagan and, 769, 772-73 
Realpolitik and, 247, 316, 317 
self-determination principle and, 221-22, 
225, 229, 239 
Truman and, 447 
U.S. exceptionalism and, 809 
U.S. foreign policy and, 29-30, 52-55, 91, 
658 

Vietnam War and, 653-54, 658, 698 
Wilson’s outline of, 44-46 
Wirth, Joseph, 282 
“Wise Men,” 671 
Witte, Serge, 174, 176 
Wohlstetter, Albert, 714-15 
Wood, Robert E., 389 
World Health Organization, 663 
World War I, 22, 44, 48, 157, 168, 289, 296, 
302, 336, 351, 353, 384, 402, 596, 603, 
606 

aftermath of, 221 
armistice announced in, 218 


91 1 



Index 


World War I ( cont . ) 

Austro-Russian relations and, 94 
British goals in, 220 
character of, 220-21 
democracy and, 219 
Europe on eve of, 326-27 (map) 
isolationist revisionism and, 378 
moral slogans and, 219 
public opinion at onset of, 183, 186, 213, 
226, 244 

stalemate in, 219 
technology and, 200, 202 
U.S. disillusionment and, 372 
U.S. entry into, 219, 221, 227 
World War I, outbreak of, 98-99, 201-17 
Austria and, 211-12, 214-13 
Belgian neutrality and, 205, 206, 213 
Britain and, 205, 212-13, 216 
France and, 205-6, 210, 212-13, 216, 
384-85 

Franco-Russian Alliance and, 202, 203, 
204 

Franz Ferdinand’s assassination and, 209 
Germany and, 204-5, 208-10, 215, 216, 
349 

military planning and, 202, 211-12 
mobilization concept and, 202, 204, 206, 
211-214, 215 

Russia and, 202-3, 206-8, 211-12, 214, 
215-16, 348-49 
Schlieffen Plan and, 204-6, 216 
technology and, 202, 206 
time element and, 213-14 
William II and, 209-10, 211, 214-16 
World War II, 34, 47, 54, 74, 76, 80, 81, 153, 
173, 176, 223, 229, 284, 318, 457, 597, 
625 

Anglo-French Naval Treaty and, 197-98 


British diplomacy in, 399-400 
Entente Cordiale and, 186 
Germany-hrst strategy in, 403-4 
occupation of Berlin in, 417-18 
onset of, 351 

‘phony war” in, 351, 352, 385-86 
postwar settlement and, 583 
second front strategy and, 403, 404-5 
separate peace proposals in, 419-20 
Soviet Union and outbreak of, 348-49 
unconditional surrender policy and, 

398 

Wurttemberg, 81, 117 

“X” article (Kennan), 454-56, 715 
Xu an Thuy, 685 

Yalta Conference (1945), 371, 396, 410, 424, 
426, 432, 434, 438, 494, 625 
Joint Declaration of, 415, 418 
postwar arrangements and, 414-15 
Soviet-Japanese warfare and, 415-16 
“Year of Europe,” 617-18 
Yeltsin, Boris, 271, 417, 785-86, 794, 798- 
799,815,817, 821 
Yemen, 546, 701 

Yom Kippur War, see Arab-Israeli War of 
1973 

Young Plan, 282-83 

Yugoslavia, 240-41, 340, 362, 366, 413, 414, 
443, 451, 552-53, 562, 806, 807 

Zaire, 807 

Zanzibar, 180 

zero option, 777, 791 

Zhdanov, Andrei, 443, 523 

Zhou Enlai, 719, 72 6, 727, 728, 729 

Zhukov, Georgi, 418, 519 


912 


